E SL. C. H. B. ' are legible upon the lining of this hat, but as there are some 
thousands of Bakers, and some hundreds of Henry Bakers in this city of ours, it 
is not easy to restore lost property to any one of them. We waited half an hour 
at the window before a train stopped. Lord Roxton rushed forward, rifle in 
hand, and threw it open. Yellow cap and sleeves. Colonel Ross's Silver Blaze. 
His face was grave, and his manner was cold in the extreme. It was clear, 
however, that Straker had defended himself vigorously against his assailants, 
for in his right hand he held a small knife, which was clotted with blood up to 
the handle, while in his left he clasped a red and black silk cravat, which was 
recognized by the maid as having been worn on the preceding evening by the 
stranger who had visited the stables. At last, as midnight approached and the 
street gradually cleared, he paced up and down the room in uncontrollable 
agitation. Until then we may each do what we like; for I can assure you that 
this inquiry has come to a definite pause. " 

The strong, masterful personality of Holmes dominated the tragic scene, and all 
were equally puppets in his hands. 

We heard the door open, a few hurried words, and then quick steps upon the 
linoleum. 'You'll do. Come! Come!' 

"'What then?' I asked. 

"'Come, man, come, only three minutes, or it won't be legal. First he passed 
two Dominicans in their long black dresses, who swept by him with downcast 
looks and pattering lips, without so much as a glance at him. We followed their 
cab until it pulled up somewhere near here. 

Holmes had sat up upon the couch, and I saw him motion like a man who is in 
need of air. "It is possible that we may be able to make you some small return 
by throwing some light upon that which is still dark to you. " 

"The credit of the execution is due to Monsieur Oscar Meunier, of Grenoble, who 
spent some days in doing the moulding. 

McGinty, who had been watching him narrowly, raised his thick black eyebrows. 
Here it was that one evening we received a visit from an acquaintance, Mr. 
There's a Booth boat for Para next Wednesday week, and if the Professor and you 
can work it, I think we should take it--what?  Very good, I'll fix it with him. 
" 

"He's right," said Barker. Holmes eyed it critically. I have been cut to the 
quick. 

"One thing comes back to my memory which may have a bearing upon the business 
that you two gentlemen are investigating. "  He had spread out his big map of 
London and leaned eagerly over it. " 

"Royal Artillery, I fancy," said Sherlock. He spun round with a scream and fell 
upon his back, his hideous red face turning suddenly to a dreadful mottled 
pallor. I laid his offence before him. 

"'I have only one thing,' he said, 'which weighs upon my mind at this supreme 
moment. Back to rest, mon petit; for, by my hilt! each day now will bring its 
own work. 

Cowed and disheartened by the loss of their leader, the Normans had given back 
and were now streaming over the bulwarks on to their own galley, dropping a 
dozen at a time on to her deck. Law or no law, I have a mind to loose a bolt at 
her. " 

"I would break your stave across my knee first," cried John, laying his great 
hand upon the bow. " He laughed like an idiot, while I made for the door. " 

"If he waits a little longer he will get no price at all. " 

"You know him?" 

"I think so. It is in the same atmosphere as ourselves, so naturally the poison 
does not act upon it. Of these he was able to give a goodly list, but had 
little doubt that it would be largely extended when the place had been more 
thoroughly investigated. Good-night to you. " 

"Now for Mr. " 

"Then I must go to his room. 

"One more question, Mr. Holmes, they were the footprints of a gigantic hound!" 













I confess at these words a shudder passed through me. Besides, I knew that my 
assistant was a good man, and that he would see to anything that turned up. The 
very noblest in the land may suffer unless some way be found out of this 
horrible affair. He was all honey when first we met him--only eighteen months 
ago, and we both feel as if it were eighteen years. Alleyne had known every 
brother well, but this was a face which was new to him--a face which was very 
red and puffed, working this way and that, as though the man were sore 
perplexed in his mind. 

The youth had now journeyed considerably beyond the furthest domains of the 
Abbey. It's open just as it was found last night. " 

He hardly opened his lips during that weary trudge across the moor, nor would 
he enter the school when he reached it, but went on to Mackleton Station, 
whence he could send some telegrams. 

"After all, what do I know about your honor?" said he. "You help Summerlee, 
young fellah. Apply them, and it will be instructive to compare results. 
Watson, 221B, Baker Street, between eight and nine this evening. It is 
fortunate that you are old school-fellows, as you must have much to talk over. 
Any instant he might dash out the light and vanish in the darkness. I leave it 
with you, however, with every confidence, and I shall call for it in person on 
Monday morning. Never have I risen to such a height, and never have I been so 
hard pressed by an opponent. 













It was the height of the reign of terror. Then with a sudden dash, so swift and 
fierce that the eye could scarce follow it, he flew in upon his man and locked 
his leg round him. It don't seem as though we've improved matters. You can 
understand that this register and diary may implicate some of the first men in 
the South, and that there may be many who will not sleep easy at night until it 
is recovered. " 

With our black silk face-coverings, which turned us into two of the most 
truculent figures in London, we stole up to the silent, gloomy house. " 

"When you combine the ideas of whistles at night, the presence of a band of 
gipsies who are on intimate terms with this old doctor, the fact that we have 
every reason to believe that the doctor has an interest in preventing his 
stepdaughter's marriage, the dying allusion to a band, and, finally, the fact 
that Miss Helen Stoner heard a metallic clang, which might have been caused by 
one of those metal bars that secured the shutters falling back into its place, 
I think that there is good ground to think that the mystery may be cleared 
along those lines. 

"Nor have I. "He put his gloves on the chair, and he took the proofs, sheet by 
sheet, to copy them. Now at last, however, he is safely in paradise, and so I 
may jog on upon my earthly way. Thank you! This is a queer old book I picked up 
at a stall yesterday--'De Jure inter Gentes'--published in Latin at Liege in 
the Lowlands, in 1642. 

"I am a Worcestershire man myself,--born near Pershore. But surely his hand was 
not tied up like that yesterday. Water ran out. Just except a little drop for 
the likes of you and--and----" 

"And you couldn't wash yourself," interrupted his companion gravely, staring up 
at his grimy visage. " 

Holmes sent off a short wire and for the rest of the drive lay back in the cab, 
with his hat tilted over his nose to keep the sun from his face. Lestrade's 
bulldog features gazed out at us from the front window, and he greeted us 
warmly when a big constable had opened the door and let us in. The room into 
which we were shown was that in which the crime had been committed, but no 
trace of it now remained save an ugly, irregular stain upon the carpet. It was 
difficult to realise as we looked at the line of fine shops and stately 
business premises that they really abutted on the other side upon the faded and 
stagnant square which we had just quitted. 

"What!" he cried. These are the scenes which my mind and my pen will dwell upon 
in every detail at some future day. What, then, shall we now do?" 

"There seems to be only one reasonable course," said Professor Summerlee. 
Still, in her heart, she must retain bitterness and hatred against those who 
had killed him and would presumably help so far as she could to have revenge 
upon them. It is all fair and above-board. Abe Slaney, Elriges Farm, East 
Ruston, Norfolk. 

"I think, Inspector," Holmes remarked, "that you would do well to telegraph for 
an escort, as, if my calculations prove to be correct, you may have a 
particularly dangerous prisoner to convey to the county jail. You see me now 
with my back like a camel and my ribs all awry, but there was a time when 
Corporal Henry Wood was the smartest man in the 117th foot. 

"Well, you need a word as well as a set of figures before you can get the lock 
to work. With the small competence he possessed, eked out by such employment as 
he could pick up, he travelled from town to town through the United States in 
quest of his enemies. I was hurried upon my last visit by the approach of the 
rainy season and by the exhaustion of my supplies. " 

He examined the lock of the safe, the door of the room, and finally the iron 
shutters of the window. 

"I have another appointment," said I. "This fellow Merryweather is a bank 
director, and personally interested in the matter. Holmes had followed him 
closely, and as the man turned with a cry of surprise and alarm he caught him 
by the collar and threw him back into the room. 

"Well, well!  What next?" said he. Where is Miss Violet Smith?" he said, in his 
quick, clear way. His last hour has come. His nostrils seemed to dilate with a 
purely animal lust for the chase, and his mind was so absolutely concentrated 
upon the matter before him that a question or remark fell unheeded upon his 
ears, or, at the most, only provoked a quick, impatient snarl in reply. He had 
evidently been in his bed when the alarm had broken out, for he wore a foppish, 
embroidered nightshirt, and his bare feet projected from his trousers. 

"Sure, your father is after giving me notice," he said. 

"And Mademoiselle's address?" he asked. I have already said that I do not 
believe that the Duchess would encourage so monstrous an action, but the lad 
had the most wrong-headed opinions, and it is possible that he may have fled to 
her, aided and abetted by this German. " He rummaged amid his newspapers, 
glancing over the dates, until at last he smoothed one out, doubled it over, 
and read the following paragraph: 

"Hotel Cosmopolitan Jewel Robbery. 

"Hast come to stop?" cried the bowman, patting Alleyne all over in his delight. 
She went to his house, as he had often begged her to do, and made her way into 
the room which he used as his sitting-room. 

"Your boy, Arthur, went to bed after his interview with you but he slept badly 
on account of his uneasiness about his club debts. I really had not the energy 
to follow it up save in a very incomplete fashion, but it gave me a basis for 
some pleasing speculation. However, we will go back at our leisure and verify 
it. Meanwhile I have so much sympathy for you that, if you choose to disappear 
in the next twenty-four hours, I will promise you that no one will hinder you. 
" 

"And then it will all come out?" 

"Certainly it will come out. I had no time to think of it. I dropped my gun and 
held him in my arms, but he almost instantly expired. " 

He smiled at my vehemence. "Then perhaps you will explain this receipted bill 
for thirteen guineas, paid by Mr. Godfrey Staunton last month to Dr. He would 
not go if he could help it. It was pitiful, however, to see his exhaustion. It 
is equally clear that his enemies, lying in wait for him near your door, 
mistook your husband for him in the foggy morning light. " The Professors 
nodded. I think, Watson, that if we drive to Baker Street we shall just be in 
time for breakfast. I had no idea of the lengths to which this would carry him, 
until the merest accident opened my eyes to it. Half an hour later, the porter 
tells me that a rough-looking man with a beard called with a note for Godfrey. 
This second one leads by means of a second small stair to a side door, used by 
servants, and also as a short cut by clerks when coming from Charles Street. 
"My health is somewhat fragile," he remarked, as he led the way down the 
passage. " 

The two detectives stared at him in amazement. Is there nothing else?" 

"They appear to be much as other footmarks. " 

"That may be. "Listen to this: 'You will see me when all is ready. Come at 
once. " 

We passed down the passage, which was of the same length as that which led to 
the garden. You must yourself have formed some theory which will explain the 
facts to which we have listened. I must go out alone. Williamson and Woodley 
were both tried for abduction and assault, the former getting seven years the 
latter ten. There is some rumor that he is or has been a clergyman, but one or 
two incidents of his short residence at the Hall struck me as peculiarly 
unecclesiastical. I shall always remember as we looked back how far behind we 
could see the heads and necks of our horrible pursuers rising and falling amid 
the reeds. 

"Dear me!  That is his most dangerous subject. 

"Ha, ha, my boy, a very much more important matter than that! What about the 
convict on the moor?" 

I stared. On the contrary, I can never recollect having seen him in such 
exuberant spirits. Here, on the contrary, were nothing but naked rocks, poor 
pasture, and savage, stone-strewn wastes. Gloomy defiles or barrancas 
intersected this wild country with mountain torrents dashing and foaming 
between their rugged sides. The clatter of waters, the scream of the eagle, and 
the howling of wolves the only sounds which broke upon the silence in that 
dreary and inhospitable region. As to the small ruse which I played upon you in 
the matter of the envelope, it is clear that, had I told you all my intentions, 
I should have been forced to resist unwelcome pressure to travel out with you. 
The self-reproach and contrition which are displayed in his remark appear to me 
to be the signs of a healthy mind rather than of a guilty one. Speaking 
generally, the dwellers upon the plains and upon the seashore seem, so far as 
my limited information goes, to have felt the effects more rapidly than those 
inland or on the heights. I therefore waited for fresh material. I left the 
house a little after eight o'clock this morning in the character of a groom out 
of work. But there are still four cartridges in the revolver. "You remember, 
Inspector Martin, when the servants said that on leaving their room they were 
at once conscious of a smell of powder, I remarked that the point was an 
extremely important one?" 

"Yes, sir; but I confess I did not quite follow you. " 

"The butcher's?" 

"And I return with an excellent appetite. But now, before we part, I want you 
to write a note to Mr. Your eyes turned across to the unframed portrait of 
Henry Ward Beecher which stands upon the top of your books. Why then should 
you, who are soldiers of the Spirit, be ever moping or hiding in cell or in 
cave, with minds full of your own concerns, while the world, which you should 
be mending, is going on its way, and neither sees nor hears you? Were ye all as 
thoughtless of your own souls as the soldier is of his body, ye would be of 
more avail to the souls of others. ' 

"'What do you mean?' she cried. 

"'This is a directory of Paris,' said he, 'with the trades after the names of 
the people. "It comes as a bit of a shock, does it not, when someone makes you 
realize that your title leaves you none the less a very ignorant man?" 

"Upon my word, sir," said Lord John, very stern and rigid, "if you were a 
younger man you would not dare to speak to me in so offensive a fashion. " 

A flush sprang to the white cheeks of the stranger. " 

"So that three days have been wasted. " 

"What do you mean?" 

The constable's features broadened into a grin. Holmes, I could not! On the one 
side seemed certain ruin, on the other, terrible as it seemed to take my 
husband's paper, still in a matter of politics I could not understand the 
consequences, while in a matter of love and trust they were only too clear to 
me. He was known in the trade as Black Peter, and the name was given him, not 
only on account of his swarthy features and the colour of his huge beard, but 
for the humours which were the terror of all around him. It was a tall order, 
that; but as the bridge was up there was no other way. You have been reading 
the papers diligently of late, have you not?" 

"It looks like it," said I ruefully, pointing to a huge bundle in the corner. " 

"About a month before. It is a very urgent message, thrice repeated to make it 
more so. The ex-prize-fighter McMurdo had, I found, been arrested as an 
accessory, and both he and Mr. The big blank spaces in the map are all being 
filled in, and there's no room for romance anywhere. I said so--I said so 
warmly, for I felt that the Professor was an ill-used man. " 

"A very sensible reply, Watson. 

"You seem to have powers that are hardly human," said he. What would Bond not 
give, poor chap, to see "J. " 

"Deeply interested--yes. If you do, then all my earnest efforts to avoid a 
scandal will be frustrated. " 

The brother scribbled a note upon a leaf of his pocket-book, and, ringing the 
bell, he handed it to the waiter. Through this we slipped, and then in the 
gathering gloom we followed Holmes until we had reached a shrubbery which lies 
nearly opposite to the main door and the drawbridge. You see the whole thing is 
a chain of logical sequences without a break or flaw. " 

"There is no connection. 

"I think we should see it to the end. 

You will realize as you read it, my dear Mr. 'It is a dangerous habit to finger 
loaded firearms in the pocket of one's dressing-gown. They have the peculiar 
flattening and thickening which marks the boxing man. " 

"How did that help you?" 

"It was all-important. This gentleman, Mr. 

The Manor House, with its many gables and its small diamond-paned windows, was 
still much as the builder had left it in the early seventeenth century. 

"Why, Holmes, it is a child's drawing," I cried. "Now that I do know it I shall 
do my best to forget it. The others gave back, and gathered in a half circle 
round the open door, gnashing their teeth and shaking their clenched hands at 
the defenders. He stopped when he saw us, and then came on again. ' 

"'It is very possible. Vincent Spaulding seemed to know so much about it that I 
thought he might prove useful, so I just ordered him to put up the shutters for 
the day and to come right away with me. He was very willing to have a holiday, 
so we shut the business up and started off for the address that was given us in 
the advertisement. But it was not the man who surprised me. " 

The brave little creature hurried away, and presently we heard the sizzling of 
a kettle. Holmes followed him, and I, leaving the horse grazing beside the 
road, followed Holmes. 

"Someone has tried to force this also. "There is another morass down yonder, 
and a narrow neck between. " 

"I could not have believed it," exclaimed Alleyne. Let me see if I can make it 
clearer. Pasques Dieu! they are made to be loved, les petites, from whimple 
down to shoe-string! I am right glad, mon garcon, to see that the good monks 
have trained thee so wisely and so well. " 

"Nay, I meant not worldly love, but rather that his heart should soften towards 
those who have wronged him. 

"But the under side is as stained as the upper. He wished to be called at nine. 
"This way!" we heard him say, and a moment later our man stood before us. It is 
strange that in one twelve hours the Abbey should have cast off its foulest 
weed and should now lose what we are fain to look upon as our choicest blossom. 
Come, Watson, let us go across ourselves and see what we can make of it. Stand 
by me and we'll save her, if I have to leave my carcass in Charlington Wood. 
Move not the bow arm, and steady with the drawing hand!" 

"I' faith," said Black Simon, "I am a spearman myself, and am more fitted for 
hand-strokes than for such work as this. Yet I have spent my days among bowmen, 
and I have seen many a brave shaft sped. 

"I am sorry to hear this," said he. "I really think that you will be more 
comfortable outside than in. " 

In town the earliest risers were just beginning to look sleepily from their 
windows as we drove through the streets of the Surrey side. There was no light 
save in the dining-room, but Holmes caught up the lamp and left no corner of 
the house unexplored. We must cast round for another scent. But Summerlee was 
at the end of his strength. This Spade-beard is a very noted captain, and it is 
his boast that there are no seamen and no archers in the world who can compare 
with those who serve the Doge Boccanegra. " 

"Nothing else I can do?" 

"Well, yes; I propose to write to him. "I wish to have a quiet word with you, 
Bradstreet. That accounts for the hammer. 

Sherlock Holmes left the house alone, and only returned after eleven. She is my 
niece; but when my brother died five years ago and left her alone in the world 
I adopted her, and have looked upon her ever since as my daughter. 

"It is nothing. 

"'Oh, any old key will fit that bureau. " 

"But I am so sure that he is innocent. " 

"I see many objections to any such theory. "Thirty times have I journeyed it, 
forward and backward, and, by the twang of string! I am wont to come back this 
way more laden than I went. I have carried all that I had into France in a 
wallet, and it hath taken four sumpter-mules to carry it back again. " 

The Duke leaned back in his chair and stared with amazement at my friend. How 
we are to get down from this place I have not as yet an idea. Of the 
Home-coming to Hampshire 











The great bell of Beaulieu was ringing. I won't hear of anythin' else. Holmes, 
that we are very much indebted to you for having cleared the matter up. 
Holmes," he said, turning the front of his coat and exhibiting the butt of a 
large revolver, which projected from the inside pocket. 

"When you go to bed lock the door of this room on the outside and keep the key. 
"I've done enough for one sitting. Holmes. A constable was standing at the 
kitchen door. 

"The Duke is here," said he. 

"'Ah, that is the point. ' 

"'Which dealer's?' 

"'Breckinridge, of Covent Garden. But what could he have to do with this old 
family custom of ours, and what does this rigmarole mean?' 

"'I don't think that we should have much difficulty in determining that,' said 
I; 'with your permission we will take the first train down to Sussex, and go a 
little more deeply into the matter upon the spot. " 

"That, of course, proves nothing at all," remarked Inspector MacDonald. It was 
a chestnut. They followed them warily, treading noiselessly in the deep snow. 
All five were sitting up, balancing themselves upon their broad, powerful tails 
and their huge three-toed hind-feet, while with their small five-fingered 
front-feet they pulled down the branches upon which they browsed. Yet when we 
bale our bowline and veer the sheet our lives will hang upon the breach 
remaining blocked. The chargers spun round each other, biting and striking, 
while the two blades wheeled and whizzed and circled in gleams of dazzling 
light. Each daughter can claim an income of 250 pounds, in case of marriage. In 
the final bout, however, Sir Nigel struck his opponent with so true an aim that 
the point of the lance caught between the bars of his vizor and tore the front 
of his helmet out, while the German, aiming somewhat low, and half stunned by 
the shock, had the misfortune to strike his adversary upon the thigh, a breach 
of the rules of the tilting-yard, by which he not only sacrificed his chances 
of success, but would also have forfeited his horse and his armor, had the 
English knight chosen to claim them. At the last instant the need of air, that 
very craving for oxygen which we alone had been able to satisfy, had sent them 
flying to the window. These cliffs, I may remark, are basaltic, and therefore 
plutonic. " 

Lestrade and Gregson glanced at each other with an incredulous smile. 

"No, it is not selfishness or conceit," said he, answering, as was his wont, my 
thoughts rather than my words. 

"An appointment. 

"Exactly. " 

"Nor Lestrade?" 

"No, sir. "Your merits should be publicly recognized. "When you go out close 
the door, for there is a decided draught. " 

"What does our young friend say to it?" asked Challenger. What can you gather 
from this old battered felt?" 

"Here is my lens. Sherlock Holmes. We want something more than mere theory and 
preaching now, though. On Monday we should have them all. I was keenly on the 
alert, therefore, for whatever would bear out this supposition, and I examined 
the room narrowly for anything in the shape of a hiding-place. " 

"Canst thou?" cried the Abbot, in a high, tempestuous tone. "We will come to 
that in its turn," said he. Now we are fresh and well, so it is all cheerful 
once more. Back and back gave Tranter, ever seeking time for a last cut. 
Alleyne, at his lord's right hand, found himself swept hither and thither in 
the desperate struggle, exchanging savage thrusts one instant with a Spanish 
cavalier, and the next torn away by the whirl of men and dashed up against some 
new antagonist. 

Tranter well knew his advantage and lost no time in putting it to use. 



There was something that touched me as I read this letter, something pitiable 
in the reiterated appeals to bring Holmes. 

"You should cultivate the scientific eye and the detached scientific mind," 
said he. "I have some record of the fellow, and he is a rough customer. We 
shall settle it now once and for all. Mon Dieu! there are some folk who have no 
fear of Domesday in them, and no sign of grace in their souls, for ever 
clutching and clawing at another man's chattels. "Ah, Holy Mother, be with us 
now!" 

As he spoke the cog rasped along the edge of the reef, and a long white curling 
sheet of wood was planed off from her side from waist to poop by a jutting horn 
of the rock. I must wash it out with some good English ale. There was a chair 
just under the lamp, and the elderly man motioned that I should sit in it. 
Bradstreet had spread an ordnance map of the county out upon the seat and was 
busy with his compasses drawing a circle with Eyford for its centre. 

"There you are," said he. "It was about three, or a little after, yesterday 
afternoon that the world finally entered the poison belt to the extent of being 
completely submerged. Your admiral may find the new guns rather larger than he 
expects, and the cruisers perhaps a trifle faster. Down this passage, Sir 
Oliver! Edricson! Ha! one of the old strain of Hampshire Edricsons, I doubt 
not. The yellow glare from the shop-windows streamed out into the steamy, 
vaporous air, and threw a murky, shifting radiance across the crowded 
thoroughfare. The packed benches of students joined in, and every time 
Challenger's beard opened, before any sound could come forth, there was a yell 
of "Question!" from a hundred voices, and an answering counter cry of "Order!" 
and "Shame!" from as many more. Thus as my predecessor weakened his practice 
declined, until when I purchased it from him it had sunk from twelve hundred to 
little more than three hundred a year. " 

"Ha! mon petit," cried the bowman, "you take me back to the days when you were 
new fledged, as sweet a little chick as ever pecked his way out of a monkish 
egg. They tell me his name is Edwards; but he will always be Jack Douglas of 
Benito Canyon to me. " 

"It would take a clever man to live upon thy labor, Hugh," remarked one of the 
foresters, "seeing that the half of thy time is spent in swilling mead at the 
'Pied Merlin. Our planet has swum into the poison belt of ether, and is now 
flying deeper into it at the rate of some millions of miles a minute. " 

"And mine also is very old," answered the squire. As I focus my mind upon it, 
it seems rather less impenetrable. 

"This is your doing, Small," said Athelney Jones, angrily. "It is marvellous. 
Let's get doun to what it is that's troubling him. What are you going to do 
with me? Arrest me? Speak out, man! You can't sit there and play with me like a 
cat with a mouse. I find that young Neligan arrived at the Brambletye Hotel on 
the very day of the crime. Then I went round the corner to the Ivy Plant for 
some brandy, and by the time I had brought it back the young woman had 
recovered and was off--ashamed of herself, I daresay, and dared not face me. 
Finally there was a creak from a chair, and the footsteps ceased. 

"It had been hoped that the proceedings would end there, and that a vote of 
thanks and congratulation, moved by Professor Sergius, of Upsala University, 
would be duly seconded and carried; but it was soon evident that the course of 
events was not destined to flow so smoothly. 

"These are the Beating Friars, otherwise called the Flagellants," quoth he. 
"What is the latest news of the ruffian?" 

MacDonald pointed ruefully to his heap of correspondence. It creaked and 
groaned, but did not yield. The full solemnity of the event loomed ever at the 
back of our minds and tempered our thoughts. When his companion and he had fled 
to some prearranged retreat--already occupied, no doubt by a confederate--the 
companion had persuaded him to leave so compromising an article of furniture. 
The love which had sprung up in his heart was not the sudden, changeable fancy 
of a boy, but rather the wild, fierce passion of a man of strong will and 
imperious temper. Roundhay, was something of an archaeologist, and as such 
Holmes had made his acquaintance. Hurry--hurry, before things get disarranged. 
" 

The lodger occupied two rooms at the vicarage, which were in an angle by 
themselves, the one above the other. "This is where we shall find them. 

"Ha! you find it so?" 

"Extremely so. An inspection of his chair showed me that he had been in the 
habit of standing on it, which of course would be necessary in order that he 
should reach the ventilator. Look at it through my lens. " 

Summerlee did so and acquiesced. 

"Pretty bad," said he, when he had heard of the dinosaur and the pit. 

Mycroft picked up the Daily News, which was lying on the side-table. 

"I will confess to my crime. 

"They are sprightly--very sprightly," Milverton answered. " 

"Ha! Did they know that they would receive this?" 

"Yes; Sir Charles was very fond of talking about the provisions of his will. " 

"And the knights upon the right, beside Don Pedro?" 

"They are cavaliers of Spain who have followed him in his exile. How do I know 
that you have been getting yourself very wet lately, and that you have a most 
clumsy and careless servant girl?" 

"My dear Holmes," said I, "this is too much. The Three Friends IX. " 

"I claim your sympathy, then, in my investigation of Mr. " 

"Without, however, the knowledge of pre-existing cases which serves me so well. 
To me all this was dreadful and deplorable. He thought no more of the matter 
until he heard in the evening of the tragedy that had occurred. Such terrific 
items had never been registered in the world's history before. 

"Well," said he, at last, "we've gone and done it, young fellah my lad. Might I 
ask you all to join in the cry of 'Fire!'? Now then; one, two, three----" 

"Fire!" we all yelled. 

"'It is simplicity itself,' said I. In it he told the young man of the imminent 
danger which threatened them, and how necessary it was that he should return. 
That one dint in the short, green grass was the only material witness left of 
this inexplicable nocturnal flight. What was the relation between them, and 
what the object of his repeated visits? Was she his client, his friend, or his 
mistress? If the former, she had probably transferred the photograph to his 
keeping. " 

"Can you shoot?" 

"About average Territorial standard. At Sir Nigel's words he started violently, 
and his swarthy features blanched to a livid gray. The firelight played over 
her features, and Alleyne thought that he had never seen such queenly power, 
such dignity and strength, upon a woman's face. I therefore cabled to my 
friend, Wilson Hargreave, of the New York Police Bureau, who has more than once 
made use of my knowledge of London crime. At four-thirty my task was not yet 
completed. The more formal we made the visit the less information we might 
obtain. Barrymore it might possibly have been, but we had left him behind us, 
and I am certain that he could not have followed us. If absent, please return 
wire to Sir Henry Baskerville, Northumberland Hotel. Oh, man, it is 
awful--awful!" He put his hands to his face, and his body shook with convulsive 
sobs. Holmes, you must save him--you must save him! I tell you that you must 
save him!" The Duke had dropped the last attempt at self-command, and was 
pacing the room with a convulsed face and with his clenched hands raving in the 
air. My groom and my page sleep out of the house, and may be set aside 
altogether. These little problems help me to do so. A number of small shops 
have come into being to meet the wants of the increased population; so there 
seems some prospect that Birlstone may soon grow from an ancient village into a 
modern town. Opposite was a large bookcase, with a marble bust of Athene on the 
top. Between them an elderly, gray-bearded man, wearing a short surplice over a 
light tweed suit, had evidently just completed the wedding service, for he 
pocketed his prayer-book as we appeared, and slapped the sinister bridegroom 
upon the back in jovial congratulation. But I could not rest, Watson, I could 
not sit quiet in my chair, if I thought that such a man as Professor Moriarty 
were walking the streets of London unchallenged. That was my poor uncle's idea. 
"Why," I cried, "it's a beech!" 

"Exactly," said Summerlee. "A fellow-countryman in a far land. That was how I 
earned the Agra treasure; and you talk to me of justice because I cannot bear 
to feel that I have paid this price only that another may enjoy it!  I would 
rather swing a score of times, or have one of Tonga's darts in my hide, than 
live in a convict's cell and feel that another man is at his ease in a palace 
with the money that should be mine. By the way, I had hoped that Tonga had lost 
all his darts; yet he managed to shoot one at us in the boat. Paul! most worthy 
mayor, my old friend is a perilous man, and I rede you that you compose your 
difference with him on such terms as you may. Throw the man my purse, Edricson, 
and let us go. " 

Alleyne, lingering behind, bethought him of the Lady Loring's counsel, and 
reduced the noble gift which the knight had so freely bestowed to a single 
penny, which the beggar with many mumbled blessings thrust away into his 
wallet. 

"It ain't night yet," she answered. "That is Mrs. What is this that you have 
done, Mr. "I thought I heard it ere we went down, and now I hear it again. But 
it seems probable enough, since the moment that Mr. James Wilder, his 
secretary, with intimation that young Lord Saltire, ten years old, his only son 
and heir, was about to be committed to my charge. 

"I observed it as you entered the room," said Holmes. 

"What's the matter, then?" 

"The Brook Street business. 

"When did it break out?" 

"I hear that it was during the night, sir, but it has got worse, and the whole 
place is in a blaze. " 

"I will. Over the door the travellers could discern the escutcheon of the 
Montacutes, a roebuck gules on a field argent, flanked on either side by 
smaller shields which bore the red roses of the veteran constable. 









The whole vast plain of Gascony and of Languedoc is an arid and profitless 
expanse in winter save where the swift-flowing Adour and her snow-fed 
tributaries, the Louts, the Oloron and the Pau, run down to the sea of Biscay. 
They are important, you understand, without being interesting. Then one of them 
stood out beside Challenger. 

He had hardly shut the door behind him when Holmes rose to put on his overcoat. 
We may have traveled two or three miles in all, keeping to the right of the 
line of the stream, when we came upon a considerable opening in the trees. " No 
one ever moved in the silent woods. 

"It depends on the player," I answered. This dark square is the Priory School. 
And, by Jove! here is the brougham coming round the corner. " 

When the commissionaire had gone, Holmes took up the stone and held it against 
the light. I could swear to it. " 

"And leave your case unfinished?" 

"No, finished. I have to make a clean breast of it all. " 

As he spoke, he whipped a tape measure and a large round magnifying glass from 
his pocket. "Go back to your master and give him greeting from Sir Nigel Loring 
of Twynham Castle, telling him that I had hoped to make his better acquaintance 
this night, and that, if I have disordered his tent, it was but in my eagerness 
to know so famed and courteous a knight. "If I have not returned, wait for me. 
"I have already told you that I can hush up that which others will be bound to 
publish, and you would really be wiser to take me into your complete 
confidence. "I will just go after him and see what he does with himself. 
Watson, this knife is surely in your line?" 

"It is what we call a cataract knife," said I. " 

Our visitor stretched forward a quivering hand and picked up the DAILY 
TELEGRAPH, which still lay upon Holmes's knee. I shall take up as little of 
your valuable time as possible, so I shall start at once upon my peculiar 
experiences. There was not a soul there save the two whom I had followed and a 
surpliced clergyman, who seemed to be expostulating with them. But no slightest 
sign of them ever met our eyes. 

"It is very much the sort of thing that I expected," said he. " 

"When?" 

"Now--within a few minutes. " 

"I didn't know. A fortnight went by, during which I frequently found my 
thoughts turning in her direction and wondering what strange side-alley of 
human experience this lonely woman had strayed into. Oh, the cunning rascal! 
This is how he gave me the slip the other night. " 

A small fly or moth had fluttered across our path, and in an instant Stapleton 
was rushing with extraordinary energy and speed in pursuit of it. 

"I could see that you were commiserating me over my weakness," said Holmes, 
laughing. Knowing that he would return there, Garcia, who is the son of the 
former highest dignitary in San Pedro, was waiting with two trusty companions 
of humble station, all three fired with the same reasons for revenge. He pushed 
on the quicker, twirling his staff merrily, and looking out at every turn of 
the path for some sign of the old Saxon residence. This may account also for 
the obvious fact that his wife has ceased to love him. Holmes. 

"The London criminal is certainly a dull fellow," said he in the querulous 
voice of the sportsman whose game has failed him. He had a large blue envelope 
in his hand, and was evidently the bearer of a message. 

"'Here is my will,' said he. I'll bear what you have said in mind, and maybe 
some day I'll come back to it. " 

All that day and the next and the next Holmes was in a mood which his friends 
would call taciturn, and others morose. 

"I hardly expect to go back to Briarbrae," answered Holmes, and waved his hand 
to us cheerily as we shot out from the station. Every word of it. 

"The first flaw in my happiness was the arrival of the red-moustached Mr. 
Holmes, they were the footprints of a gigantic hound!" 













I confess at these words a shudder passed through me. " 

Holmes smiled. Why did you pass these other chairs?" 

"I don't know, sir, it didn't matter to me where I sat. ' 

"'Good! That's a promise,' said he, rising from his chair. That was all right. 
Those statements, as I am bound to admit, we are now in a position to endorse. 
And now let us talk about George Meredith, if you please, and we shall leave 
all minor matters until to-morrow. Good God, it's dreadful to think of!  That 
West, of all men, should have done such a thing!" 

"You are sure of his guilt, then?" 

"I can see no other way out of it. I think that that bit of news has consoled 
young McCarthy for all that he has suffered. " 

"No, I wrote upon the day before. "With two such men as yourself and Lestrade 
upon the ground, there will not be much for a third party to find out," he 
said. Getting back was comparatively simple. However, when our turn came the 
little man was much more favourable to me than to any of the others, and he 
closed the door as we entered, so that he might have a private word with us. I 
have enough already upon my soul since I crossed the threshold of this cursed 
house. I did not see either Barker or Mrs. 

It was a tremendously virile and yet sinister face which was turned towards us. 
It is a quarter-sheet. I nearly fainted with the horror of it, and yet I had to 
keep a bold and smiling face; for well I knew that if I did not it would be out 
of my house that they would come next with their bloody hands and it would be 
my little Fred that would be screaming for his father. And indeed to watch him 
dallying with a little gobbet of bread, or sipping his cup of thrice-watered 
wine, is enough to make a man feel shame at his own hunger. " 

"My sweet bird," said Sir Nigel, "I am right loth to part from you, but we are 
now at the fringe of the forest, and it is not right that I should take the 
chatelaine too far from her trust. 

"What are you doing here?" 

"Can I speak confidentially?" 

"No, certainly not. This kept him out most of the day, and he had not found 
occasion yet to report himself to the head of the lodge of the Eminent Order of 
Freemen. There was a hush as he entered, and many a curious glance was cast at 
him; but the relations between policemen and criminals are peculiar in some 
parts of the States, and McGinty himself, standing behind his counter, showed 
no surprise when the policeman enrolled himself among his customers. If 
Stapleton came into the succession, how could he explain the fact that he, the 
heir, had been living unannounced under another name so close to the property? 
How could he claim it without causing suspicion and inquiry?" 

"It is a formidable difficulty, and I fear that you ask too much when you 
expect me to solve it. In drawing her up from the world, he was day by day 
being himself dragged down towards it. 

"'Pray, let me have the details,' I cried. It was two in the morning before 
they came to the lonely house. 

Stanley Hopkins led us first to the house, where he introduced us to a haggard, 
gray-haired woman, the widow of the murdered man, whose gaunt and deep-lined 
face, with the furtive look of terror in the depths of her red-rimmed eyes, 
told of the years of hardship and ill-usage which she had endured. "Tut! These 
girls! These girls!" he cried. "To think that the same petticoats should come 
between two of my boys! It's the devil's own luck! Well, it's the colleen 
inside of them that must settle the question; for it's outside the jurisdiction 
of a Bodymaster--and the Lord be praised for that! We have enough on us, 
without the women as well. "Look at the magnificent types! Look at these two 
men who are coming towards us, for example. T. ,' scrawled upon it in pencil. 

"He looked inside the envelope. "And you, Baldwin, if you don't take your hand 
off your pistol, you'll cheat the hangman yet. Pull it out, or by the Lord that 
made me--There, that will do. There are forty armed men round this house, and 
you can figure it out for yourself what chance you have. The younger had left 
us, but he suddenly returned through another door, leading with him a gentleman 
clad in some sort of loose dressing-gown who moved slowly towards us. 
Therefore, he foresaw what he would do. Some further remark of Lord Roxton's 
about the danger only made me irritable. Yet it were madness to spring for that 
narrow slit with nought but the wet, smooth rock to cling to. " 

"Could we not get a warrant and legalize it?" 

"Hardly on the evidence. In the middle of it was the black figure of the 
secretary, his head advanced, peering out into the night. That servant, I found 
upon inquiry, was so ill that she had gone to her bed. 

"They must be cunning devils," he exclaimed at last. The old cab had actually 
pulled up at Challenger's door. A minute later, however, when Hunter rushed out 
with the hound he was gone, and though he ran all round the buildings he failed 
to find any trace of him. Already the doors had all been shut and the whistle 
blown, when-- 

"My dear Watson," said a voice, "you have not even condescended to say 
good-morning. 

"I entered, and I took you into my confidence as to the suggestions of the side 
table. Paul! I have no great love for them," quoth Sir Nigel. " 

"Indeed, my fair sir, you speak sooth," quoth he with the club, while the other 
seated himself once more by the wayside. 

"Pray proceed. The small matter in which I endeavoured to help the King of 
Bohemia, the singular experience of Miss Mary Sutherland, the problem connected 
with the man with the twisted lip, and the incident of the noble bachelor, were 
all matters which are outside the pale of the law. With the shock, his 
broad-brimmed hat flew from his head, his cravat slipped down from his lips, 
and there were the long light beard and the soft, handsome delicate features of 
Colonel Valentine Walter. It was a terrible household that Black Peter Carey 
had made for himself, and it was with a sense of relief that we found ourselves 
in the sunlight again and making our way along a path which had been worn 
across the fields by the feet of the dead man. He thought I should brood over 
it if I knew all, and so he was silent. " 

"So it would seem. "Nay, lady," said he, "that were worst of all. " 

This last argument, however, by no means commended itself to the pupil of 
Ockham, who plucked a great stick from the ground and signified his dissent by 
smiting the realist over the pate with it. The daughter told us as much. Here 
the two combatants drew their swords and threw off their doublets, for neither 
had any defensive armor. For months my life was despaired of, and when at last 
I came to myself and became convalescent, I was so weak and emaciated that a 
medical board determined that not a day should be lost in sending me back to 
England. 

And that was a most vague direction. 

"Oh, no, Mr. Holmes," said he, laying his hand hard upon my friend's sleeve. I 
saw to it myself. It hath ever grieved me that I had not his name, for he smote 
upon me with a mace and went upon his way ere I was in condition to have much 
speech with him; but his arms were an allurion in chief above a fess azure. 

"'One evening, about the third week after our start, the doctor had come down 
to see one of the prisoners who was ill, and putting his hand down on the 
bottom of his bunk he felt the outline of the pistols. I was very weak, but I 
have had a good deal to go through. " 

"We are of the White Company, my fair lord," said John. "Can I not speak with 
my own son but you must let your tongue clack? A soldier, quotha, and never a 
hair on his face. Would you mind getting that orchid for me among the 
mare's-tails yonder? We are very rich in orchids on the moor, though, of 
course, you are rather late to see the beauties of the place. Every vein and 
crack and mottling of that face of rock remained forever stamped upon his 
memory. The plans, which are exceedingly intricate, comprising some thirty 
separate patents, each essential to the working of the whole, are kept in an 
elaborate safe in a confidential office adjoining the arsenal, with 
burglar-proof doors and windows. " 

"With designs upon the succession. 

"I did not know you quite so well in those days. I have only a few words to say 
to you, and they can very well be said where we are. " 

Holmes rubbed his hands, and his eyes glistened. Colonel Lysander Stark had 
said that it was only seven miles, but I should think, from the rate that we 
seemed to go, and from the time that we took, that it must have been nearer 
twelve. And yet I live and keep bees upon the South Downs. Yet I should ill do 
my part towards your father if I did not teach you to curb your tongue-play. 
Why had he done this? And why did she weep so bitterly? Already round this 
pale-faced, handsome, black-bearded man there was gathering an atmosphere of 
mystery and of gloom. And then suddenly it struck me that what was dark to me 
might be very light to Mr. " 

"Well, then, supposing that 'C. " 

The inspector endeavoured to look interested. Kindly walk clear of the path. 
Thank you. I came personally, Mr. And so, old friend, my heart is hot within 
me, and I long to hear the old battle-cry again, and, by God's truth! if Sir 
Nigel unfurls his pennon, here is one who will be right glad to feel the 
saddle-flaps under his knees. I went to Devonshire with the conviction that 
Fitzroy Simpson was the true culprit, although, of course, I saw that the 
evidence against him was by no means complete. Holmes. There may have been only 
one. On one side of him sat old Johnston, who was busy in trimming the feathers 
of some arrows to his liking; and on the other Hordle John, who lay with his 
great limbs all asprawl, and his headpiece balanced upon his uplifted foot. 

"Faith, John," said the prince, "it sounds as though you were right. 
McFarlane's guilt definitely established. Advise you to abandon case. LESTRADE. 

"A telegram for you, Mr. "After all," said I, "the clue of the matter lies 
probably here in town. " 

Phelps gave a groan. How black is the great tower, and how bright the gleam of 
arms upon the wall! See below the flag, how it twinkles like a star!" 

"Aye, it is the steel head-piece of the watchman," remarked the archer. How the 
White Company came to be Disbanded XXXVIII. There was a double stream upon the 
stair, some going up in hope, and some coming back dejected; but we wedged in 
as well as we could and soon found ourselves in the office. There are the 
heather and the flowers and the birds. " 

"They are typewritten," I remarked. 

I had one strange experience as I came from this second visit which had 
involved my being away for a night from my companions. There is nothing more 
stimulating than a case where everything goes against you. On one side of him 
sat old Johnston, who was busy in trimming the feathers of some arrows to his 
liking; and on the other Hordle John, who lay with his great limbs all asprawl, 
and his headpiece balanced upon his uplifted foot. The head had been beaten in 
by repeated blows of some heavy and blunt weapon. The others were invisible. 
Ah, there you see another blaze on the top of Crowborough Hill. "Hold it to the 
glass!" he cried. 

"That is unnecessary," said Holmes. Two of the lads walked up to the trainer's 
house, where they had supper in the kitchen, while the third, Ned Hunter, 
remained on guard. Christopher upon the sail, and brushed three of Sir Oliver's 
men-at-arms from the forecastle. " 

"I prythee that you will pardon me," said the knight, clutching his way along 
the bulwark. " 

"By my soul," said Sir Oliver, "you are as tart as verjuice this morning! If 
you are bent upon a quarrel with me I must leave you to your humor and drop 
into the 'Tete d'Or' here, for I marked a varlet pass the door who bare a 
smoking dish, which had, methought, a most excellent smell. "Thou hast done 
evil within my bailiwick, and must die. I dare scarce wag my tongue so freely 
with you as when we tramped together past Wilverley Chase, else I might be your 
guide now, for indeed I know every house in Bordeaux as a friar knows the beads 
on his rosary. I know that everything was turning round, and the words of the 
clergyman were just like the buzz of a bee in my ear. " 

His eyes shone, and his cheek was flushed with the exhilaration of the master 
workman who sees his work lie ready before him. " 

"It seemed to be of an unnatural color, and to have a strange rigidity about 
the features. Two days later he received a bulky envelope, which contained a 
short note from the detective, and a typewritten document, which covered 
several pages of foolscap. The driver pointed with his whip. Their master lay 
upon his face in the centre of the room. Others were continuing their game. The 
nurse had turned and was pushing her perambulator hurriedly up the hill again. 
Scraps of popular songs were chorused with an enthusiasm which was a strange 
prelude to a scientific lecture, and there was already a tendency to personal 
chaff which promised a jovial evening to others, however embarrassing it might 
be to the recipients of these dubious honors. 

Thus, when old Doctor Meldrum, with his well-known curly-brimmed opera-hat, 
appeared upon the platform, there was such a universal query of "Where DID you 
get that tile?" that he hurriedly removed it, and concealed it furtively under 
his chair. Holmes. He was wrapped in some sort of dark ulster or blanket, which 
left only his face exposed; but that face was enough to give a man a sleepless 
night. We have the place to ourselves, but for a sergeant up-stairs. " 

McMurdo shrugged his shoulders. "It may, of course, be a mere coincidence, or 
it may point to some nervousness which would indicate that he had reason to 
apprehend danger. solution. Would you care to try it?" 

"No, indeed," I answered, brusquely. Suppose that this man Boone had thrust 
Neville St. Clair through the window, there is no human eye which could have 
seen the deed. Out of the window he must apparently have gone for no other exit 
could be discovered, and the ominous bloodstains upon the sill gave little 
promise that he could save himself by swimming, for the tide was at its very 
highest at the moment of the tragedy. It is true that in some cases the figure 
was bearing a flag, and in some cases not, but it was probable, from the way in 
which the flags were distributed, that they were used to break the sentence up 
into words. How did he acquire wealth? He is unmarried. Holmes?" 

"Well, Mr. The address, you observe is printed in rough characters. 

It was a bewildering route for anyone who was not accustomed to face Nature in 
her wildest moods. "Now Vincent Square. Lack-brain she is, and lack-brain I 
shall call her. " 

Such was a sample of the sudden janglings which marred the peace of that little 
class. 

"Nay, we should drift upon the rocks. 

I was forced to confess that he was right. It is not upon this occasion the 
instrument of evil, but it will rather prove to be the key which will unlock 
our mystery. But the most dreadful ill-luck pursued me. " 

"It is of import," said he, "for I love to keep my hair well ordered, seeing 
that the weight of my helmet for thirty years hath in some degree frayed it 
upon the top. And yet the chiel has shown us once before that he knows what 
he's talking about. " 

"Where was the clue?" 

"Well, if you were to pull down a bell-rope, Watson, where would you expect it 
to break? Surely at the spot where it is attached to the wire. He turned, 
however, at the sound of their hoofs, and it was clear that his blindness was a 
cheat like all the rest of him, for he ran swiftly through a field and so into 
a wood, where none could follow him. 

"La petite is frightened," said he. Lyons flushed with anger again. However, 
both of them were under his influence, and he had nothing to fear from them. He 
had come to offer apologies for his rudeness of the morning, and after a long 
private interview with Sir Henry in his study the upshot of their conversation 
was that the breach is quite healed, and that we are to dine at Merripit House 
next Friday as a sign of it. " 

"I quite understand your position," said Holmes, with a mischievous twinkle in 
his eyes. "Gentlemen, I beg that you will be frank with me. The problem is 
solved. The nurse-girl slapped one of her charges and then began to push the 
perambulator up the hill. His black beard poured forward in a more impressive 
cascade, and his clear grey eyes, with their insolent and sardonic eyelids, 
were even more masterful than of yore. The tall man leaned heavily upon her to 
take the weight off his tender foot, while he held his burden betwixt himself 
and the wall, cuddling it jealously to his side, and thrusting forward his 
young companion to act as a buttress whenever the pressure of the crowd 
threatened to bear him away. There was so strange a turmoil within my own head, 
and such a jangling of my overstrung nerves, that the indifference of those 
people was amazing. "Among those gelatine cultivations some of the very worst 
offenders in the world are now doing time. He was noble, unselfish, loving--all 
that my husband was not. His plump face was twitching with his nervousness, and 
his fingers could not keep still. I am sure that his top-hat, had I ever 
ventured to don it, would have slipped over me entirely and rested on my 
shoulders. He was a sportsman, was Godfrey, down to his marrow, and he wouldn't 
have stopped his training and let in his skipper if it were not for some cause 
that was too strong for him. You will understand now how it was that I strove 
to keep the peace with him, and you will in some measure sympathize with me in 
the fears which fill me, now that he has gone from me to his other victim with 
threats upon his tongue. " 

"Unless we succeed in establishing an alternative theory, this man is lost. " 

"What Bodymaster?" 

"James H. Powdered opium is by no means tasteless. The flavor is not 
disagreeable, but it is perceptible. John Turner, who made his money in 
Australia and returned some years ago to the old country. 

"By the rood!" he broke out suddenly, slapping his thigh with his great red 
hand, "I knew that there was something a-missing, but I could not bring to my 
mind what it was. "Who would 'e get to serve 'im?" 

"Someone else," I suggested lamely. The Bodymaster looked at them with an 
approving smile. Sherlock Holmes, one day in the autumn of last year and found 
him in deep conversation with a very stout, florid-faced, elderly gentleman 
with fiery red hair. "God's truth! how could I have mistook you?  If instead o' 
standin' there so quiet you had just stepped up and given me that cross-hit of 
yours under the jaw, I'd ha' known you without a question. Ah, you're one that 
has wasted your gifts, you have!  You might have aimed high, if you had joined 
the fancy. Are you all ready?  Then we had better go down, for it is a little 
past the hour. I may yet show you how a great mind molds all Nature to its use. 
I satisfied myself that it was a cab and not a private carriage by the narrow 
gauge of the wheels. 

It was after tea on a summer evening, and the conversation, which had roamed in 
a desultory, spasmodic fashion from golf clubs to the causes of the change in 
the obliquity of the ecliptic, came round at last to the question of atavism 
and hereditary aptitudes. His increasing fame had brought with it an immense 
practice, and I should be guilty of an indiscretion if I were even to hint at 
the identity of some of the illustrious clients who crossed our humble 
threshold in Baker Street. At that last meeting Professor Challenger had made 
certain assertions which had been queried by his colleague. On the sixth day, 
he reached the Eagle Cañon, from which they had commenced their ill-fated 
flight. 

"Well," said our engineer ruefully as we took our seats to return once more to 
London, "it has been a pretty business for me! I have lost my thumb and I have 
lost a fifty-guinea fee, and what have I gained?" 

"Experience," said Holmes, laughing. 

"I come," he shouted in a hoarse, thick voice, with a strong Breton accent, "as 
squire and herald from my master, who is a very valiant pursuivant-of-arms, and 
a liegeman to the great and powerful monarch, Charles, king of the French. "Has 
anything else occurred to you?" 

"Yes, and no later than to-day. " 

"No, no, I did not mean my husband. Not a word came to us either from Wiggins 
or from the other agencies. " 

"They have treated me shamefully--shamefully. "By my hilt! I pray that your 
dream may come true, for the prince hath not set us out here to drink broth or 
to gather whortle-berries. George! our life is short, and we should be merry 
while we may. " So saying, the prince turned his back upon the King of Spain, 
and springing upon his horse, rode slowly homewards to the Abbey of Saint 
Andrew's. It was marked, however, at the outset by an incident which left the 
most sinister impression upon my mind. She was of the German type, blonde and 
fair-haired, with the piquant contrast of a pair of beautiful dark eyes with 
which she surveyed the stranger with surprise and a pleasing embarrassment 
which brought a wave of colour over her pale face. She departed then and the 
lights went out, and I was left squatting in the rhododendron-bush. 

"'I am sorry that I broke my promise, Jack,' said she; 'but if you knew all the 
circumstances I am sure that you would forgive me. "He only comes there to see 
me, apparently, for the place is deserted up to the very hour he names. " 

The inspector shook his head despondently, however. Aylward, who had drawn an 
arrow from his quiver, carefully greased the head of it, and sped it at the 
same mark. Do you take charge of the right; I will hold the centre, and you, my 
Lord of Angus, the left. 

"My dear sir," cried Holmes, "there cannot be the least doubt in the world that 
it has been written by two persons doing alternate words. It was not the result 
of any convulsion, as in the case of the ascending tunnel. So it would be best, 
since you think so lowly of me, that you should take this path to the left 
while I keep on upon this one; for it is clear that I can be no fit companion 
for you. 

It was a Saturday evening in May. An extraordinary change had come over his 
face. " 

We were all astonished by the appearance of the apartment into which he invited 
us. 

"Is all ready for your journey?" he asked. "And yet--and yet--well, we have 
some suggestive facts to act upon. " 

"Every success to your investigation, be the criminal who it may," answered the 
nobleman, as he bowed us out the door. There can be no question, my dear 
Watson, of the value of exercise before breakfast. Holmes. From north, south, 
east, and west every man who had a shade of red in his hair had tramped into 
the city to answer the advertisement. Behind the bowmen strode two trumpeters 
blowing upon nakirs, and two drummers in parti-colored clothes. In front, amid 
radiating lines of poplars, lay the riverside townlet of Cardillac--gray walls, 
white houses, and a feather of blue smoke. This catastrophe I am inclined to 
regard as an unhappy accident, for I am convinced that the lady had no 
intention of inflicting so grievous an injury. There is a groove upon its 
surface showing that a great tendon played across it, which could not be the 
case with a clavicle. Next morning they had passed Belle Isle, and ran through 
the midst of a fleet of transports returning from Guienne. The other, clad in a 
dirty russet suit with a long sweeping doublet, had a cunning, foxy face with 
keen, twinkling eyes and a peaky beard. Nearer we came and nearer. It was the 
scene of the murder. My friend would stay some little time at the fall, he 
said, and would then walk slowly over the hill to Rosenlaui, where I was to 
rejoin him in the evening. Sherlock Holmes was pacing up and down the platform, 
his tall, gaunt figure made even gaunter and taller by his long grey 
travelling-cloak and close-fitting cloth cap. I have driven down to tell you 
so. " 

"Have you her photograph?" 

"I brought this with me. "Then perhaps canst tell me the name of a great 
loathly lump of a brother wi' freckled face an' a hand like a spade. Your own, 
your own, ever your own! My father is the king's man, and when he rides into 
the press of fight he is not thinking ever of the saving of his own poor body; 
he recks little enough if he leave it on the field. As you lie dying, think of 
Lopez, whom you shot five years ago on the Putomayo River. Alleyne, wretchedly 
ill and weak, with his head still ringing from the blow which he had received, 
crawled up upon deck. Water-swept and aslant, it was preferable to the noisome, 
rat-haunted dungeons which served as cabins. There, clinging to the stout 
halliards of the sheet, he gazed with amazement at the long lines of black 
waves, each with its curling ridge of foam, racing in endless succession from 
out the inexhaustible west. With an expressive sweep of his hands one of them 
pointed to the woods around them, and indicated that they were full of danger. 
Finally he handed a note to the boy, with directions to put it into the hands 
of the person to whom it was addressed, and especially to answer no questions 
of any sort which might be put to him. 

"The indications are ruined by three days' delay. A prodigiously stout man with 
a very smiling face and a great heavy chin which rolled down in fold upon fold 
over his throat sat at her elbow with a pair of glasses on his nose, looking 
very earnestly at the ladies who entered. We will leave this question undecided 
and hark back to our morass again, for we have left a good deal unexplored. How 
then shall I find a means to convey us?  Some little time ago I had remarked to 
our young friend here that free hydrogen was evolved from the geyser. I laid 
the two tresses together, and I assure you that they were identical. The fact 
was that I had just seen something which filled me with surprise and at the 
same time narrowed the field of our inquiry immensely. You will excuse these 
remarks from one who, though a mere connoisseur of crime, is still rather older 
and perhaps more experienced than yourself. They spoke of those hours of 
burrowing. I am pleased to think that I shall be able to free society from any 
further effects of his presence, though I fear that it is at a cost which will 
give pain to my friends, and especially, my dear Watson, to you. " 

"By my hilt! and so do I," cried Aylward. "I am afraid that my colleague has 
been a little quick in forming his conclusions," he said. In the present state 
of Siam it is most awkward that I should be away from the office. Taking 
courage, therefore, I slipped rapidly across it, and among the jungle on the 
farther side I picked up once again the brook which was my guide. It was a 
cheery companion, gurgling and chuckling as it ran, like the dear old 
trout-stream in the West Country where I have fished at night in my boyhood. 
Then I heard of this place--curse the hour that the name first fell upon my 
ears!--and I came to better myself! My God! to better myself! My wife and three 
children came with me. You were thinking that if the portrait were framed it 
would just cover that bare space and correspond with Gordon's picture there. " 

"Dr. 

"What's this, Dawson!" he cried. Scott Eccles," said Holmes in a soothing 
voice. "I am bound to say that everything which you have said agrees very 
closely with the facts as they have come to our notice. Gregson or Mr. 

Sherlock Holmes and I read these notices over together at breakfast, and they 
appeared to afford him considerable amusement. Save for Challenger's luggage we 
had never a difficulty. My brother was one of the founders, and I have myself 
found it a very soothing atmosphere. " 

"This is all very well," said I, "but the thing becomes more unintelligible 
than ever. 









The prince's reception-room, although of no great size, was fitted up with all 
the state and luxury which the fame and power of its owner demanded. "You are 
the day porter, are you not?" 

"Yes, sir, I go off duty at eleven. " 

The young man smiled with an air of embarrassment. The waves have driven in the 
sail wherewith we strove to stop the hole. 

"Now, let us calmly define our position, Watson," he continued as we skirted 
the cliffs together. Neville St. Clair and swore that the presence of the 
clothes in his room was as much a mystery to him as to the police. But our trap 
should be here. 

"Have you seen Pierrot's advertisement to-day?" 

"What?  Another one?" 

"Yes, here it is: 

"To-night. " 

We were fortunate in finding that Lord Holdhurst was still in his chambers in 
Downing Street, and on Holmes sending in his card we were instantly shown up. 
Bernstone, and from the Indian servant, who, Mr. It is believed, however, that 
the police have a clue as to the real culprits, and that it is being prosecuted 
by Mr. " 

"Good old Watson!  You are the one fixed point in a changing age. "These are 
much deeper waters than I had thought. They seem to have covered their tracks. 

"They chose us because neither I nor the boy here drink," Lawler explained. 
"You help Summerlee, young fellah. The soles which you are at this moment 
presenting to me are slightly scorched. " 

"Did William say anything to his mother before going out?" 

"She is very old and deaf, and we can get no information from her. "It came by 
the last post," said he. It biases the judgment. Her movements upon the Monday 
night have not yet been traced, but it is undoubted that a woman answering to 
her description attracted much attention at Charing Cross Station on Tuesday 
morning by the wildness of her appearance and the violence of her gestures. On 
the ledge of rock above this strange couple there stood three solemn buzzards, 
who, at the sight of the new comers uttered raucous screams of disappointment 
and flapped sullenly away. Certainly the bullet had been discharged at very 
close quarters. Holmes was bending over my chair, his flask in his hand. Flora 
was a dear little thing, but exceedingly hot-headed and devotedly attached to 
me. She wrote me dreadful letters when she heard that I was about to be 
married, and, to tell the truth, the reason why I had the marriage celebrated 
so quietly was that I feared lest there might be a scandal in the church. 

"Well, when I called last week I was shown into the little office as usual, but 
I found that Miss Stoper was not alone. 'It is high, but it may be that you can 
jump it. 'I am myself weak in the eyes, and have often taken one thing for 
another,' quoth the knight, as he sprang back into his saddle and rode off, 
leaving the Sieur de Crespigny biting his nails before the door. I tell you 
that it is four or none with us. " 

"Had he ever spoken of Swandam Lane?" 

"Never. Had the boy a bicycle?" 

"No. 

"I heard some rumour of it," said he. I was making my way through this at a 
point which was just out of sight of my companions, when, under one of the 
trees, I noticed something red huddled among the bushes. Browner were at home, 
and if Browner had departed in the May Day. He was on the South American line 
when that was taken, but he was so fond of her that he couldn't abide to leave 
her for so long, and he got into the Liverpool and London boats. Two of their 
guards bounded after them and fell to two bullets from Lord John. Alleyne bore 
his share and his ale-mug away with him to a retired trestle in the corner, 
where he could sup in peace and watch the strange scene, which was so different 
to those silent and well-ordered meals to which he was accustomed. From above 
it seemed as though rope and cliff were well-nigh touching, but now, when 
swinging a hundred feet down, the squire found that he could scarce reach the 
face of the rock with his foot, and that it was as smooth as glass, with no 
resting-place where a mouse could stand. In the centre of this vast assemblage 
the lists seemed but a narrow strip of green marked out with banners and 
streamers, while a gleam of white with a flutter of pennons at either end 
showed where the marquees were pitched which served as the dressing-rooms of 
the combatants. 

I was still drinking in this wonderful panorama when the heavy hand of the 
Professor fell upon my shoulder. I would not brawl in the presence of death, 
but I can assure you that if I were a younger man your monstrous conduct would 
not pass with impunity. I had no idea of the lengths to which this would carry 
him, until the merest accident opened my eyes to it. 

"'See here,' said the operator after he'd gone out, 'I guess we should charge 
double rates for this. "You never tire of the moor. " 

"I understood that it did not open. 

"I could see that you were commiserating me over my weakness," said Holmes, 
laughing. And we, my poor Watson, want overcoats and cravats and goloshes, and 
every aid that man ever invented to fight the weather. Gregson," said the 
American, looking across at the official, "I don't know what your British point 
of view may be, but I guess that in New York this lady's husband will receive a 
pretty general vote of thanks. " 

"She will have to come with me and see the chief," Gregson answered. 

"A very singular one. "This case of yours, Mr. 

"I wrote it rather hurriedly. " 

Lestrade shot an angry glance at my companion. "It is not now when you are in 
grief that I would vex your mind with such base and sordid matters. We know the 
doings of our cousin Charles. A warm wind blew from the westward, and heavy 
clouds moved slowly across the sky, with half a moon peeping occasionally 
through the rifts. So it was to-day. I approached and knocked at the door, 
which was instantly opened by a tall, gaunt woman with a harsh, forbidding 
face. Eat a good breakfast, Watson, for I propose to get upon Dr. Armstrong's 
trail to-day, and once on it I will not stop for rest or food until I run him 
to his burrow. " 

"In that case," said I, "we had best carry our breakfast with us, for he is 
making an early start. But there has been some one else,--a very able and 
efficient ally. My notes would help to pass the weary hours and to occupy my 
thoughts. For heaven's sake help me!" 

"Yes, I will help you. A jagged stone was lying among the moss, and this also 
he carefully examined and retained. When he glanced up again, Alleyne had, with 
a few bold strokes of the brush, tinted in a woman's face and neck upon the 
white sheet in front of him. Now, as I looked up at the same cliffs, I saw 
discs of light in every direction, ruddy, clearly-defined patches, like the 
port-holes of a liner in the darkness. It was simply a ruse to divert inquiry 
into a wrong channel. The markings were done in pencil, and ran in this way: 



GRAPHIC 



Holmes examined it for some time, and then, folding it carefully up, he placed 
it in his pocketbook. Holmes seemed to know the grounds perfectly, and he 
threaded his way swiftly among a plantation of small trees, I close at his 
heels, and our foremost pursuer panting behind us. " 

"Consider the facts, sir. The local police had to be called in, they had to 
communicate with Scotland Yard, Hopkins had to go out, and he in turn had to 
send for me. The Adventure of the Copper Beeches 







ADVENTURE I. For seven dollars a week paid in advance he was to have board and 
lodging. The floor was covered thickly with the prints of a naked foot,--clear, 
well defined, perfectly formed, but scarce half the size of those of an 
ordinary man. 

Something had evidently aroused his suspicions. 

"Why? What do you mean?" 

"Because you have just as good a chance of finding this lady in the one as in 
the other. "Here, Lestrade, your brandy-bottle! Put her in the chair! She has 
fainted from ill-usage and exhaustion. " 

She opened her eyes again. (You will excuse the frankness of this report, will 
you not, sir?)  "He'd never forgive me for leaving such unexhausted copy behind 
me. Besides, so far as I can see it is not worth discussing, since we can't get 
down, even if we wanted. " 

"When had he a letter before that?" 

"Not for several days. He was white to the very lips, and had sunk down on the 
stone against which he had been leaning. 

Having sounded his call, he thrust the bugle into his belt, and, pushing his 
way betwixt the groups of English and of Gascon knights, he reined up within a 
spear's length of the royal party. "Any ignoramus can hand down his worthless 
memory by imposing it upon a mountain or a river. I need no such monument. " 

"Nor," said Lord John, "is there much doubt as to how he met his death. 
Besides, there was no real difficulty. Then, when the cable came, I knew they 
were bound to make a move. It was some minutes before he spoke. Now carry out 
my orders to the letter. 

"What is this?" he asked. "Watson won't allow that I know anything of art but 
that is mere jealousy because our views upon the subject differ. Now, these are 
a really very fine series of portraits. It could only be a small one, or it 
would have been remarked upon at the coroner's inquiry. In the far corner was a 
smithy, where a grimy lad was at work. Before I reach the surprising events of 
that date I would desire to give a clearer sketch of my comrades in this 
enterprise, and of the associates whom we had already gathered together in 
South America. My health forbade me from venturing out unless the weather was 
exceptionally genial, and I had no friends who would call upon me and break the 
monotony of my daily existence. There was one sergeant that was horribly 
wounded and yet kept on swimming for a surprising time, until some one in mercy 
blew out his brains. " 

"No better explanation can be given with our present knowledge; and yet 
consider, Sherlock, how much you leave untouched. " 

"Then, when the row broke out, I had a little moist red paint in the palm of my 
hand. 

"Tell us, then, how Cadogan West met his end before you laid him upon the roof 
of a railway carriage. "What does it prove?" 

"Shall I tell you?" he cooed. "You have forced me, against my own judgment, to 
tell you, and now we must both make the best of it. I bid you very heartily 
welcome, and the more so as you are come at a moment when we are sore put to it 
for means of defence. The matter is a perfectly trivial one"--he jerked his 
thumb in the direction of the old hat--"but there are points in connection with 
it which are not entirely devoid of interest and even of instruction. " 

"I can assure you, Mr. " 

"You say it was large?" 

"Enormous. " 

"Then I will take up no more of your time. Supposing I unravel the whole 
matter, you may be sure that Gregson, Lestrade, and Co. will pocket all the 
credit. " 

"Then leave it at that and keep your head shut. You could have got fifteen to 
one yesterday, but the price has become shorter and shorter, until you can 
hardly get three to one now. " 

"My dear doctor," said he, kindly, "pray accept my apologies. Simon shrugged 
his shoulders and raised his eyebrows. Here, signed with her initials, is the 
very note which was no doubt quietly slipped into her hand at the door and 
which lured her within their reach. Everything is in order. He followed the 
man, reached the window, saw the abstraction of the documents, and pursued the 
thief. 

"No thank you," says he; "I should much prefer not to go aboard. You observed 
that her right glove was torn at the forefinger, but you did not apparently see 
that both glove and finger were stained with violet ink. I trust that I shall 
soon have to congratulate you upon a successful conclusion. 

"He was stanch and true, was little Tonga. "Let us ride down upon their camp 
ere they discover us. After that, as you know, there can be no bad blood 
between us. The book, however, had been left in the billiard-room, so I pulled 
on my dressing-gown and started off to get it. He has been buying things for 
children, you perceive. It was a nightmare, the grey, dusty church, the rows of 
agonized figures, the dimness and silence of it all. 

And then there were the dead!  At first those endless groups of drawn and 
grinning faces filled us with a shuddering horror. This he did partly because 
your mother was dead, and partly because your elder brother, now Socman of 
Minstead, had already given sign of that fierce and rude nature which would 
make him no fit companion for you. Forth we rode then, but when we came to the 
'Mouton d'Or,' Gourval had had word of our coming and its purpose, so that the 
door was barred, nor was there any way into the house. 'Let us in, good Master 
Gourval!' cried Simon, and 'Let us in, good Master Gourval!' cried I, but no 
word could we get through the hole in the door, save that he would draw an 
arrow upon us unless we went on our way. ' 

"'I can promise you the one, but not the other,' he snarled, and so turned his 
rounded back upon me, and went peering and blinking out of the room. From all 
parts of the hall squires and pages came running, until a dense, swaying crowd 
surrounded the disputants. Lucas had the house to himself. What occurred during 
that time has not yet transpired, but at a quarter to twelve Police-constable 
Barrett, passing along Godolphin Street observed that the door of No. Then, 
again, where is the price of his treason? Once would have expected to find a 
large sum of money in his pocket. "Come, Herr Professor, we're not going to 
quarrel at this time of day. " 

We scrambled from rock to rock, until in a few moments we had made our way to a 
point from which we could see the front door of the inn. " 

"Bethink you, my fair lord," said Alleyne to Sir Nigel, "that we have never 
injured these men, nor have we cause of quarrel against them. "By Saint James! 
it is now my turn to show you where my weapon has the better of you. It will be 
a comfort to me to know that I have one ally in the hall, however inefficient 
and ignorant of the subject he may be. She would not herself stay in the house 
another day and was starting that very afternoon to rejoin her family at St. 
Ah!" He drew in his breath with a shrill, excited intake. In the dim light I 
saw his head thrown forward, his whole attitude rigid with attention. Only 
then, when the wheels were almost moving, did I suddenly realize that my 
liberty lay in my own hands. Even shaking would tell him nothing, for as the 
plaster was wet it was probable that the pearl would adhere to it--as, in fact, 
it has done. " 

"Well, well," said Holmes, good-humouredly. "Mon Dieu! What! am I not the 
champion of the Bishop of Montaubon? Ah, could I have descended, could I have 
come down, ere he fled! Then you would have seen. You would have beheld a 
spectacle then. "I did write it. It was in the course of them that I contracted 
this complaint. On the summit was a small uneven plateau, with a stretch across 
of a hundred paces, and a depth of half as much again. Holmes had sat down 
again after one of these excursions, when he suddenly sprang out of his chair 
with a loud exclamation. " He scribbled the appointment on his shirt-cuff and 
hurried off in his strange, peering, absent-minded fashion. " 

"Her father is very rich?" 

"He is said to be the richest man on the Pacific slope. "It is my desire that 
every possible effort should be made. " 

"What have you to say, you clean-shaved galley-beggar?" cried the fiery dame, 
turning upon the archer. The man was popular; for he had a rough, jovial 
disposition which formed a mask, covering a great deal which lay behind it. 
Another minute brought them up with the rear-guard, where every man marched 
with his beard on his shoulder and a face which was agrin with merriment. They 
were drawn on six different banks. They then did the deed with the queerest and 
noisiest weapon in the world so as to tell everyone what had happened--a weapon 
that was never seen in the house before. He lay in the roadway so shaken in his 
wits that he never saw what became of the cab. But he was always kind to the 
boy in his own way. Holmes, that you can see deeply into the manifold 
wickedness of the human heart. I have been followed from London Bridge Station, 
and I am sure that they are only waiting for the warrant to arrest me. 

"I fear there is some dark ending to our quest," said he. 

Holmes smiled at the compliment. " 

"Dear me!" said Challenger, puffing out his chest and stroking his beard. 
Holmes. "I expect, as usual, he knows a good deal that we don't. The Greek e 
with the peculiar top flourish is distinctive. Tavistock itself lies two miles 
to the west, while across the moor, also about two miles distant, is the larger 
training establishment of Mapleton, which belongs to Lord Backwater, and is 
managed by Silas Brown. In every other direction the moor is a complete 
wilderness, inhabited only by a few roaming gypsies. Lestrade, one of the very 
smartest of our detective officers, being in charge of the case. I had relied 
upon him to look after this. " 

"I will compress the story as far as may be done without omitting anything 
vital to the case. Holmes," said Hopkins, "I do not know how to express my 
gratitude. "There is nothing there, no sign that anyone has landed--but why 
should he leave any sign?" 

"Exactly. Yet, as you see, he hath left me, as he hath left many another poor 
border archer, with no grip for bill or bow. 

As they passed through the castle gate, John plucked at Aylward's sleeve, and 
the two fell behind. I heard the sharp snap of a twisted key. I did not even 
knock when I reached it, but turned the handle and rushed into the passage. To 
hear his quick step moving here and moving there from early morning to late at 
night, and yet never to catch so much as a glimpse of him--it's more than I can 
stand. Why should this servant be so anxious to master this old formula? 
Evidently because he saw something in it which had escaped all those 
generations of country squires, and from which he expected some personal 
advantage. "He would have killed you. "QUESTION!" VI. "I WAS THE FLAIL OF THE 
LORD" VII. " 

"This really grows outrageous, Mr. I have a vague remembrance of his gaunt 
limbs, his earnest face, and the rise and fall of his bow. ' 

"I was very angry, for this was the third demand during the month. Professor 
Challenger raised his hand in the air as a signal, and at once our colleague, 
Mr. I'll show him up for the fraud he is. " 

A shower of rain fell while we were in the train, and the heat was far less 
oppressive in Croydon than in town. Was there any other spirit but rum in the 
room?" 

"Yes, there was a tantalus containing brandy and whisky on the sea-chest. "I 
had already considered that possibility. Simon has not already arrived. 

"Excuse me," he said, "but it is not my custom to discuss my most intimate 
personal affairs in this public manner. I intruded upon him. Our plantation was 
at a place called Muttra, near the border of the Northwest Provinces. Holmes's 
cold, thin fingers closed round my wrist and led me forward down a long hall, 
until I dimly saw the murky fanlight over the door. Here Holmes turned suddenly 
to the right and we found ourselves in a large, square, empty room, heavily 
shadowed in the corners, but faintly lit in the centre from the lights of the 
street beyond. "A soft revolver bullet, as you perceive, Watson. I should say 
he is about the best-hated man in London. Yours faithfully, ST. ' 

"That is the letter which I have just received, Mr. The fire was burning 
brightly, and in the grate there was a mass of black, fluffy ashes, as of 
burned paper, while the brass box stood open and empty beside it. The conduct 
of the criminal investigation has been left in the experienced hands of 
Inspector Lestrade, of Scotland Yard, who is following up the clues with his 
accustomed energy and sagacity. The fellow was making his way into the house. " 

"Have you it there?" I asked. I only mention it because, if I had been handling 
the case, I should have been inclined to make that the starting-point of my 
investigation. My heart stood still within me as it flashed across me that the 
beast, whatever it was, must surely be after ME. But at last he made a 
trip--only a little, little trip--but it was more than he could afford when I 
was so close upon him. Holmes. The letter which had been the messenger of death 
for Milverton lay, all mottled with his blood, upon the table. It is certain, 
therefore, that my sister was quite alone when she met her end. That's the 
situation, so far as I could follow it. " 

Holmes shrugged his shoulders as we walked away together. If the art of the 
detective began and ended in reasoning from an arm-chair, my brother would be 
the greatest criminal agent that ever lived. " 

"I have a cab outside. 

"One moment, sirs," cried Alleyne, who was leaning on Ford's shoulder, with the 
broken sword, which he had picked up, still clutched in his right hand. Slowly 
the shadows darkened over the long, sombre face of the old house. 

"Upon my word, Watson!" said Holmes at last with an unsteady voice, "I owe you 
both my thanks and an apology. 

"'Oh, any old key will fit that bureau. Barker; but it would come with a better 
grace from you. " 

"Oh, you think so, do you? Well, all I can say is that if there's any secret 
here it is not my secret, and I am not the man to give it away. The archers 
doffed caps at the sight of it, and the bailiff crossed himself devoutly as he 
handed it to the robber. Sherlock Holmes is free to devote his life to 
examining those interesting little problems which the complex life of London so 
plentifully presents. " 

"You do me too much honour," said Holmes, gravely. Our only clue lay in the 
truncated telegram, and with a copy of this in his hand Holmes set forth to 
find a second link for his chain. The woman's disappearance counts for nothing, 
since in that extraordinary household any member of it might be invisible for a 
week. " 

"Excellent!" cried Holmes, clapping the Inspector on the back. 

"Give me that field-glass, Malone," said he gravely. Challenger had from the 
moment of joining us issued directions to the whole party, much to the evident 
discontent of Summerlee. He sat slowly down, blew out his chest, passed his 
hand caressingly down his beard, and looked with drooping eyelids and 
supercilious eyes at the crowded hall before him. Yet his actions were in 
absurd contrast to the dignity of his dress and features, for he was running 
hard, with occasional little springs, such as a weary man gives who is little 
accustomed to set any tax upon his legs. Beaten back on to the deck of his own 
vessel, and closely followed by a dozen Englishmen, he disengaged himself from 
them, ran swiftly down the deck, sprang back into the cog once more, cut the 
rope which held the anchor, and was back in an instant among his crossbow-men. 
At the same time the Genoese sailors thrust with their oars against the side of 
the cog, and a rapidly widening rift appeared between the two vessels. " 

"No doubt, Doctor; and yet the conversation may prove more important than the 
treatise. "And now, Dr. But before doing so I took a stroll in the curious 
old-world garden which flanked the house. As to his relations with women, they 
appeared to have been promiscuous but superficial. It was a giant dog, as large 
as a calf, tawny tinted, with hanging jowl, black muzzle, and huge projecting 
bones. " 

It was a strange sight had there been anything but the buzzards to see it. " 

"Well, my dear fellow, we have already arrived at the conclusion that the 
message received by Garcia at dinner was an appointment or an assignation. He 
is a man of good birth and excellent education, endowed by nature with a 
phenomenal mathematical faculty. " 

"And who is this Captain Calhoun?" 

"The leader of the gang. He spoke in a calm and methodical manner, as though 
the events which he narrated were commonplace enough. He heard no shot; but it 
was hardly possible he would, as the pantry and kitchens were at the very back 
of the house and there were several closed doors and a long passage between. I 
took him in hand, though he was as venomous as a young snake, and after a 
couple of months I got him all right and able to walk. But it does seem a queer 
thing," he added, with a bitter smile, "that I who have a fair claim to nigh 
upon half a million of money should spend the first half of my life building a 
breakwater in the Andamans, and am like to spend the other half digging drains 
at Dartmoor. " 

"Thank you," said Holmes. " 

"Did you ever trouble to see who called for them?" 

"No. By the side of the track the old dame was standing, fastening her red 
whimple once more round her head. " 

There is ever a flaw, however, in the best laid of human plans, and the 
murderers of John Openshaw were never to receive the orange pips which would 
show them that another, as cunning and as resolute as themselves, was upon 
their track. " 

It was Holmes's turn to look astonished. Holmes, I have not. Mrs. Carey has 
identified it as being her husband's property. " 

Holmes was lost in thought for some time. " 

"Morally, Mr. " 

"But why should he come. " 

"Streams may spring from one source, and yet some be clear and some be foul," 
quoth she quickly. There was something sinister in his eyes. " 

"Can I be of assistance?" 

"Your presence might be invaluable. " 

"Was he the only applicant?" 

"No, I had a dozen. You say that you saw it. " 

"Did any see it after?" 

"I have not heard of any. " 

The taciturn Austin saluted and withdrew. Gregson sprang out of his chair and 
upset the remainder of his whiskey and water. Within all was absolute silence 
and darkness. A small page admitted us, and we began at once to ascend the 
broad, well-carpeted stair. We opened it, and the light of the lantern gleamed 
upon a collection of gems such as I have read of and thought about when I was a 
little lad at Pershore. Warren left us, when a distant tinkle announced that 
our mysterious neighbour had rung. " 

"I don't see how that is to be managed, unless you break in the door. " 

"I am in hopes that she does. But you do not yourself look upon this as 
likely?" 

"I do not think Flora would hurt a fly. Therefore, it has survived the poison. 
Hence, we may argue that every amoeba outside this room, instead of being dead, 
as you have erroneously stated, has really survived the catastrophe. As to your 
practice, if a gentleman walks into my rooms smelling of iodoform, with a black 
mark of nitrate of silver upon his right forefinger, and a bulge on the right 
side of his top-hat to show where he has secreted his stethoscope, I must be 
dull, indeed, if I do not pronounce him to be an active member of the medical 
profession. It wavered and quivered above us for a minute, the morning sun 
gleaming upon its sleek, sinuous coils. The place was a rookery of 
pterodactyls. Among these men there was a stringent code of honour, any 
infringement of which was punished by death. One day the professor was 
lecturing on poisions,  and he showed his students some alkaloid, as he called 
it, which he had extracted from some South American arrow poison, and which was 
so powerful that the least grain meant instant death. Above the other door, 
which opened on to the landing, there hung a fanlight which could be drawn by a 
cord when some ventilation became absolutely necessary. It was already twilight 
when we reached the scene of our problem. The older man sat in that wicker 
chair; it was he who used the cigar-holder. It was the last conscious movement 
he was to make upon earth. He had prepared a sort of collar of leather with 
many straps depending from it. Only when I pressed the cold muzzle of the 
revolver to his temple did he at last understand that resistance was vain. " 

"You may bring my harness from below," said Sir Nigel to his squires, "and 
also, I pray you, bring up Sir Oliver's and we shall don it here. "I have had 
occasion to tell you more than once that things are not ordered in this way in 
Aquitaine. " 

Dame Eliza looked doubtfully at him, as though fearing some other stratagem, 
but, as he made no demand for ale, she finally brought the paints, and watched 
him as he smeared on his background, talking the while about the folk round the 
fire. "We must give the room a little time to clear. " 

"To the old camp?" I asked. He means that the noise is less for our being out 
of the country. In his tweed suit and cloth cap he looked like any other 
tourist upon the moor, and he had contrived, with that catlike love of personal 
cleanliness which was one of his characteristics, that his chin should be as 
smooth and his linen as perfect as if he were in Baker Street. Now, Mr. I know 
that a paper has disappeared. It might not even now be too late to overtake 
him, so I set off at once in the direction of Merripit House. " 

"Surely I can come with you, then?" said I. "I said that it was not my secret 
and that I could not tell it to you. " 

"Has aught befallen you, then?" 

"Yes, or I have been slave to my own fancy. It is most important, all the same. 
Ah, Watson, you have just come at the right time. " 

The pleasant old lady had appeared in the doorway. As she did so, the loose 
gown fell back from her forearms. At last, however, as we reached the thicker 
woods they gave up the chase, and we saw them no more. It straightened itself 
into a little black man--the smallest I have ever seen--with a great, misshapen 
head and a shock of tangled, dishevelled hair. Holmes. " 

"Don't we?" my friend answered thoughtfully. "With two such men as yourself and 
Lestrade upon the ground, there will not be much for a third party to find 
out," he said. 

Gregson rubbed his hands in a self-satisfied way. The reward. And then 
suddenly, with a crashing and a rending, a thudding of giant feet and a panting 
of monster lungs the beast was upon me once more. Three-forty is our train, and 
I fancy we should be back in Baker Street for dinner. " 

Only one word of epilogue. I am Alexander Holder, of the banking firm of Holder 
& Stevenson, of Threadneedle Street. I passed round the garden without seeing 
anything more than random tracks, which I took to be the police; but when I got 
into the stable lane a very long and complex story was written in the snow in 
front of me. " 

And so it was arranged. "It was extremely good of you. But our dispute, friend, 
is concerning the nature of that subtle essence which we call thought. I've 
never shown you my little store. I don't want to be remembered as a common 
cut-throat. There were six of us, and we had a wild, free life of it, sticking 
up a station from time to time, or stopping the wagons on the road to the 
diggings. Wadley sent a message: 'The President of the Zoological Institute 
presents his compliments to Professor Challenger, and would take it as a 
personal favor if he would do them the honor to come to their next meeting. '  
The answer was unprintable. ' 

"'You have visited Japan. 

"That was my singular interview with Professor Moriarty. "You have both won 
honor from this meeting, and it would be sin and shame to let it go further. 
"Why did you drive me to such extremities? I assure you I wouldn't hurt a fly 
of my own accord, but every man has his business, and what was I to do? I put 
the price well within your means. Because you gave me your word that you would 
do as you were told, and I tell you to stay. " 

"All right, then, I'll stay. And, first, one or two questions, Mr. How do you 
go back?" 

"By train from Waterloo. As we walked noiselessly amid the thick, soft carpet 
of decaying vegetation the hush fell upon our souls which comes upon us in the 
twilight of the Abbey, and even Professor Challenger's full-chested notes sank 
into a whisper. 

"And now I have to consider the motive of this singular crime. "You gave me a 
few particulars in your letter, Mr. Might I beg that you would have the 
goodness to sit down upon one of those boxes, and not to interfere?" 

The solemn Mr. This cosmic disturbance of the spectrum proves it. It was a 
blank sheet. It was I--" 

Von Bork sat up in amazement. "In Brixton Road, this morning," it ran, "a plain 
gold wedding ring, found in the roadway between the 'White Hart' Tavern and 
Holland Grove. Apply Dr. " 

"What on earth does this mean?" I ejaculated after I had twice read over the 
extraordinary announcement. Some secretive lover, beyond all doubt. I had 
traversed half a mile or so when suddenly the sound was repeated, still behind 
me, but louder and more menacing than before. It is only by remembering certain 
complex landmarks that I am able to do it. I don't think that I am a coward, 
Watson, but that sound seemed to freeze my very blood. Eventually we found 
ourselves through the narrows of Obidos and reached the town of Manaos. Here we 
were rescued from the limited attractions of the local inn by Mr. The famous 
Smith-Mortimer succession case comes also within this period, and so does the 
tracking and arrest of Huret, the Boulevard assassin--an exploit which won for 
Holmes an autograph letter of thanks from the French President and the Order of 
the Legion of Honour. The man cannot come near the woman, or he will guide 
their enemies to her. 

"Boys," said he, "there's one man in this town that wants trimming up, and it's 
for you to see that he gets it. 

"Yes, Mr. " 

"Oh! a joke, was it? You won't find the laugh on your side, I promise you. Have 
my horse ready, Alleyne; for, by St. James Desmond?" 

"Yes; he once came down to visit Sir Charles. I really think that we may 
eliminate him entirely from our calculations. There was no one in the 
corridors, Mr. It was the wild dream of an opium smoker, a vision of delirium. 
One condition mentioned in the Ritual would then be fulfilled. Turner. Above 
the woods which lined it upon the farther side we could see the red, jutting 
pinnacles which marked the site of the rich landowner's dwelling. It was 
already twilight when we reached the scene of our problem. 

The outhouse was the simplest of dwellings, wooden-walled, shingle-roofed, one 
window beside the door and one on the farther side. You did not know where to 
look, and so you missed all that was important. Scott Eccles, and let us have 
your statement in writing. " 

"Who is your district ruler?" 

"Bartholomew Wilson. "I was staggered for the moment," he said, "but the thing 
is quite natural. " 

"It came about in this way. It might be his portrait. " 

"Madam," said Holmes, "I am sure that it is the truth. The fog was so thick 
that a cab was useless. I could have torn my hair and beaten my head in my 
despair. I guessed I'd fight through it all right on my own, my luck was a 
proverb in the States about '76. Carruthers, who seemed interested in what I 
said, and told me that he had ordered a horse and trap, so that in future I 
should not pass over these lonely roads without some companion. We are thrown 
rather together. This deadly silence was appalling. Lanner. It is a very deeply 
planned and cold-blooded murder. " 

"Well, if that's all you have against him," cried McGinty with a laugh, "you 
can save yourself a deal of trouble by dropping it right now. " 

"Who by?" 

"The landlord of the Alpha. 

"Meaning British prejudice in all its queer manifestations. 

"The devil take your tongue, Wat!" shouted a tall young man, seizing the last 
speaker by the collar and giving him an admonitory shake. " 

"Got your letter?" 

I produced the envelope. "Say, rather what it is that I owe to thee, good 
youth. Why, a Yankee crook would be into that with a can-opener. " 

And yet it was clear from his actions that he thought more seriously of this 
new intrusion than his words would show. Might I venture?" 

"No, sir, no--certainly not. From every gesture and expression I could see that 
he was a reserved, self-contained man, with a dash of pride in his nature, more 
likely to hide his wounds than to expose them. To right and left of the turrets 
were more modern wings of black granite. He thought no more of the matter until 
he heard in the evening of the tragedy that had occurred. 'Remember, my boy, 
not one word to your parents about the affair until everything is settled. We 
will keep it as a little surprise for them. Thrusting in my head between the 
stems, I found myself gazing at a fleshless skull. The whole skeleton was 
there, but the skull had detached itself and lay some feet nearer to the open. 
These are the documents in the extraordinary case of the Gloria Scott, and this 
is the message which struck Justice of the Peace Trevor dead with horror when 
he read it. " 

Mr. If there were another man with such singular powers in England, how was it 
that neither police nor public had heard of him? I put the question, with a 
hint that it was my companion's modesty which made him acknowledge his brother 
as his superior. Do you understand?" 

I nodded, and stood by the door. Payment in hard cash when goods delivered. 

"Pierrot. You said it should not be again. You cursed fools, you are trapped, 
every one of you!" 

We were too astounded to speak. And then you will return in front of him. By 
Our Lady! I am no chicken, but I cannot claim to know as much of war as the 
squire of Sir Walter Manny. She was bending over her knitting and stopping 
occasionally to stroke a large black cat upon a stool beside her. That is the 
only drawback which we have found to her, but we believe her to be a thoroughly 
good girl in every way. Already he had earned the reputation of a good boon 
companion, a cheery reveller, and withal a man of high temper, who would not 
take an insult even from the all-powerful Boss himself. But in addition to this 
he impressed his comrades with the idea that among them all there was not one 
whose brain was so ready to devise a bloodthirsty scheme, or whose hand would 
be more capable of carrying it out. " He held up a little crumpled piece of 
paper. They broke off in the middle. Now, is not that the proper life for a 
soldier?" 

"The proper life for a robber!" roared Hordle John, in his thundering voice. I 
was knocked all in a heap therefore at seeing a light in the window, and I 
suspected as something was wrong. " 

I was much astounded by this programme, though I remembered that Holmes had 
said to Stapleton on the night before that his visit would terminate next day. 
Our visitor readjusted his glasses and began: 



"The recent sudden death of Sir Charles Baskerville, whose 

name has been mentioned as the probable Liberal candidate 

for Mid-Devon at the next election, has cast a gloom over 

the county. He wore rather baggy grey shepherd's check trousers, a not 
over-clean black frock-coat, unbuttoned in the front, and a drab waistcoat with 
a heavy brassy Albert chain, and a square pierced bit of metal dangling down as 
an ornament. May good St. I am sorry to state that I have had to seriously 
complain of his conduct in the train, and I should be wanting in frankness if I 
did not say that it has left a most unpleasant impression in my mind. " 

"We are of the White Company, my fair lord," said John. I would rather that my 
Company should gather round me here on the poop, where we might abide together 
whatever God may be pleased to send. 

"Before examining the room I cross-questioned the servants, but only succeeded 
in eliciting the facts which I have already stated. He walked with his head 
sunk, his shoulders curved, and his knees bent, as one who strives hard to 
remain unseen. 

"Why, Mr. " 

"Why?" 

"Because we bring him news of his lost son. " 

"And yet she had a certificate of death. The daughter told us as much. Aloysius 
Doran, at Lancaster Gate, where breakfast had been prepared. Two days 
later--that is, on Wednesday last--there is a curt announcement that the 
wedding had taken place, and that the honeymoon would be passed at Lord 
Backwater's place, near Petersfield. Holmes propped it against the cruet-stand 
and read it while he ate. 

Mycroft Holmes was a much larger and stouter man than Sherlock. Anyhow I am 
taking no more chances. The screw was a pound a week rise, and the duties just 
about the same as at Coxon's. I inquired of him whether he had ever heard of 
Colonel Lysander Stark. I was too shaken to go to bed again, however, so I 
dressed, and as soon as it was daylight I slipped down, got a dog-cart at the 
Crown Inn, which is opposite, and drove to Leatherhead, from whence I have come 
on this morning with the one object of seeing you and asking your advice. 
Watson has not heard the opening part but also because the peculiar nature of 
the story makes me anxious to have every possible detail from your lips. Draw 
up a little to the fire, and we will talk this matter over. " 

"A most painful matter to me, as you can most readily imagine, Mr. It was about 
six inches long, and thicker than my thumb, with some indications of dried 
cartilage at one end of it. Every paper which would incriminate him was 
destroyed before he left the house. I tried to read, but my thoughts would 
wander off to our strange quest and to the ill-assorted and villainous pair 
whom we were pursuing. I swear it. Thank you, Mr. You, Carruthers, give me that 
revolver. But send her nothing--not even the chaplet--until I am gone. Holmes 
here has come from London to help us, and we shall do all that is possible. It 
was a homely little room, with a low ceiling and a gaping fireplace, after the 
fashion of old country-houses. " 

"Did you see any other trace of life?" 

"No, sir, I did not; but during the week that we lay encamped at the base of 
the cliff we heard some very strange noises from above. He clambered up and 
waved his arms in the air. The commissionnaire and his wife have been examined 
in every way without any light being thrown upon the matter. Under no 
conceivable circumstances were the plans to be taken from the office. The hasp 
sprang open with a loud snap. Among them moved Aylward and other of the older 
soldiers, with a few whispered words of precept here and of warning there. " 

"It seems a singularly useless thing to steal," said Sherlock Holmes. I don't 
know when I've known him make a better one, and he's ordered a good dish of 
cutlets for his lunch. " 

"Your narrative is most interesting," said Sherlock Holmes. I think that there 
was probably some more tangible cause. Do try to bring him. 

"Ah!  You recognize the symptoms?" 

"Only too well. Slowly the shadows darkened over the long, sombre face of the 
old house. I was stiff and sore from head to foot, but there was no limb which 
would not move, no joint which would not bend. I sprang out of bed and flung 
open the shutters. I described Drebber's death to him, and I gave him the same 
choice of the poisoned pills. 

"'Arthur!' I screamed, 'you villain! you thief! How dare you touch that 
coronet?' 

"The gas was half up, as I had left it, and my unhappy boy, dressed only in his 
shirt and trousers, was standing beside the light, holding the coronet in his 
hands. The steersman smiled, and pointed with his foot to where a short heavy 
cross-bow quarrel stuck quivering in the boards. He must have placed it on the 
table before he was attacked; otherwise, of course, it would have fallen when 
he fell. " 

"And you think you have evidence that he murdered his late master?" 

"I didn't say so, Mr. It must be done at once. " 

"His ticket, of course, would show that. " 

"A stranger in these parts?" 

"Yes. 

"Well, we carried him in, Abdullah, Akbar, and I. I climbed half-way up the 
rock before I shot him. " 

"And what the better for that, old beef and bones?" asked Black Simon. Sherlock 
Holmes looked slowly round, and his face assumed an ominous expression. 

"There is something devilish in this, Watson," said he, more moved than I had 
ever before seen him. The room was a long and lofty one, stone floored and 
bare, with a fire at the further end upon which a great pot was boiling. He has 
grown gray in the service, is a gentleman, a favoured guest in the most exalted 
houses, and, above all, a man whose patriotism is beyond suspicion. 

"You will now light the gas, Watson, but you will be very careful that not for 
one instant shall it be more than half on. Mortimer had finished reading this 
singular narrative he pushed his spectacles up on his forehead and stared 
across at Mr. Mr. Summerlee will need a younger colleague. I will not disguise 
from you that there are difficulties and dangers. " 

"Oh, he has his faults, too," said Mr. We have it filed at the office. 

"I can assure you," said Holmes, "that every essential is already known. 
Mortimer, who had begun to show signs of some strong emotion, "I am telling 
that which I have not confided to anyone. " 

Thus encouraged, our scientific friend drew his papers from his pocket and 
presented the whole case as he had done upon the morning before. " He shouted a 
hoarse order, and his seamen worked swiftly and silently, heightening the 
bulwarks and strengthening them. "You came in as the knight does in the 
jongleur's romances, between dragon and damsel, with small time for the asking 
of questions. Why should I attempt to conceal it?" 

"Why, indeed?" murmured Holmes. I fancy she knew something, for I may have 
dropped a word here or a word there; but until yesterday, after you gentlemen 
had seen her, she never knew the rights of the matter. I wonder I didn't drop. 
Yours faithfully, ST. 



"Hopkins has called me in seven times, and on each occasion his summons has 
been entirely justified," said Holmes. "The community is certainly the gainer, 
and no one the loser, save the poor out-of-work specialist, whose occupation 
has gone. " 

"It darkens every moment of our lives. "On the contrary, I have half a 
sovereign for you if you will give me a clear answer to my questions. Is Mrs. " 

She looked round into the shadows of the room. Would it not be better to be 
frank?" 

For an instant there was hesitation in her beautiful face. " 

"My imitation of the clucking hen who had just laid an egg was also considered 
rather above the average. Yet I admit that there may very well be places where 
an expert human climber may reach the summit, and yet a cumbrous and heavy 
animal be unable to descend. " 

"Ha! Sir Nigel, how like you that?" quoth Bertrand, shaking his head. On 
leading Toby to the place where he had committed his fault, he cast about in a 
wide circle and finally dashed off in a fresh direction. " 

"I could take a note back. Indeed, he was a very worthy gentleman, of good 
courage, and great hardiness, and it grieves me that he should have come by 
such a hurt. Brain, character, soul--only as one sees more of life does one 
understand how distinct is each. 

The very next day we did actually make our start upon this remarkable 
expedition. I am a London University man, you know, and I am sure that you will 
not think that I am unduly singing my own praises if I say that my student 
career was considered by my professors to be a very promising one. 

"I was on my guard all that next day, and never went out into the park. If he 
goes by road with his legs all dripping, it's odds that someone will notice 
him. I am convinced that he really believed in his heart that I came round to 
the Chestnuts three days a week for the pleasure of his company, and very 
especially to hear his views upon bimetallism, a subject upon which he was by 
way of being an authority. For example, in Dr. None of us alluded during dinner 
to the cause which had brought us together. Each will go on with his 
interrupted job as Austin has snatched up his hose-pipe or the golfer continued 
his game. Together they have a cumulative force. The door of the study was 
open, and a candle was burning upon the table. 

Now, it opened into a broad space in which stood two of 

those great stones, still to be seen there, which were 

set by certain forgotten peoples in the days of old. "I not leave you. We could 
put him down an old shaft when we've done with him; but however we work it we 
can't get past the man living at Hobson's Patch and you being there to-day. 

"That's all right," said Lestrade, as we parted. Simeon and the Devil. '" 

"Or the 'Jest of Hendy Tobias. Malone. Now, off you run, and see what you can 
make of him. Yet we must leave you now, for I must be with the King of Spain 
ere your army crosses the mountains. It was finally agreed, however, that he 
should retain the young Swiss messenger with him as guide and companion while I 
returned to Meiringen. John Bull. It is past ten, however, and quite time that 
we started. Another day--two at the most--and I have my case complete, but 
until then guard your charge as closely as ever a fond mother watched her 
ailing child. In a minute we had torn off the gag, unswathed the bonds, and 
Mrs. But if I have hit upon the true explanation of this one small phenomenon, 
then in an instant the case rises from the commonplace to the exceedingly 
remarkable, for it can only mean that Lady Brackenstall and her maid have 
deliberately lied to us, that not one word of their story is to be believed, 
that they have some very strong reason for covering the real criminal, and that 
we must construct our case for ourselves without any help from them. 

After a long pause, therefore, to recover my breath and my courage, I continued 
my ascent. My dear wife knew that I had business in the City. The smarting of 
it recalled in an instant all the particulars of my night's adventure, and I 
sprang to my feet with the feeling that I might hardly yet be safe from my 
pursuers. I could see at a glance that she was sick with fear, and the sight 
sent a chill to my own heart. It was not very loud--it seemed to be muffled. " 

"Go on, old babe of the woods!" "Have at it, Hampshire!" cried the archers 
laughing. McGinty carefully closed the door, and then seated himself on one of 
them, biting thoughtfully on his cigar and surveying his companion with those 
disquieting eyes. 

"Brother Morris," said he, "you were always a croaker. Holmes," said he, "but 
if you are so very sharp you ought to be sharp enough to know that it is you 
who are breaking the law now, and not me. "You are ready enough to use all the 
information that the police can lay at your disposal, and then you try to 
finish the case yourself and bring discredit on them. "What has this to do with 
the matter you are investigating?" 

"I must repeat the question. 

"I have done no harm. But where have I looked upon your face before?" 

"No longer ago than last night at the 'Pied Merlin,'" the clerk answered, 
recognizing the escaped serf who had been so outspoken as to his wrongs. 
Perchance it would be well that we should ask him whither he rides, for it may 
be that he is one who desires to advance himself in chivalry. " 

The pious Alleyne was deeply shocked by this reminiscence. I had no idea that 
you had found my occasional retreat, still less that you were inside it, until 
I was within twenty paces of the door. 

And have I not cause for such a feeling? Consider the long sequence of 
incidents which have all pointed to some sinister influence which is at work 
around us. 

"'Yes, I promise. "Surely this is not your husband's writing, madam. " 

"There's no room for a mistake," he answered. Sherlock Holmes can return to 
London by the morning train. My wife was on a visit to her mother's, and for a 
few days I was a dweller once more in my old quarters at Baker Street. 

"'This is very extraordinary conduct, Mr. He came up to my room one morning, 
and plunged into business in an instant. 

"Any news?" he asked, eagerly. " 

Holmes put the slip of paper carefully away into his pocket-book. "The ancient 
chain of the township of Lepe! This is but a sorry jest, Sir Nigel. His bridle 
is missing, so that Simpson must have put this on. In an instant I had caught 
him round the waist, and held him up while Holmes and Pycroft untied the 
elastic bands which had disappeared between the livid creases of skin. 

"He was last seen on the night of May 13th--that is, the night of last Monday. 
"Watson won't allow that I know anything of art but that is mere jealousy 
because our views upon the subject differ. "Some touch of the artist wells up 
within me, and calls insistently for a well-staged performance. Surely our 
profession, Mr. Neither is it a very far-fetched inference that a man who 
inherits one article of such value is pretty well provided for in other 
respects. 

"Please, sir," he said, touching his forelock, "I have the cab downstairs. "I 
think you must agree, Watson, that it is not a case in which we are called upon 
to interfere. Arthur was the most single-minded, chivalrous, patriotic man upon 
earth. You others come with me. Creep forward quietly and see what they are 
doing--but for heaven's sake don't let them know that they are watched!" 

I tiptoed down the path and stooped behind the low wall which surrounded the 
stunted orchard. Creeping in its shadow I reached a point whence I could look 
straight through the uncurtained window. 

There were only two men in the room, Sir Henry and Stapleton. 

"So I think. " 

"It is a northern coat. 

"How comes it, dog?" asked Sir William Felton in Spanish. "I never noticed it 
before," he said. If it were not for the late Sir Charles Baskerville and some 
other kind hearts I might have starved for all that my father cared. " 

Alleyne sat down willingly as directed with two great bundles on either side of 
him which contained the strollers' dresses--doublets of flame-colored silk and 
girdles of leather, spangled with brass and tin. " 

"But it had not approached the body?" 

"No. Do you say nothing has come out of that room--absolutely nothing?" 

The landlady drew an envelope from her bag; from it she shook out two burnt 
matches and a cigarette-end upon the table. " 

"Now, what could Jonathan Small do?  He could only continue to keep a secret 
watch upon the efforts made to find the treasure. I should feel so much 
stronger if I felt that you were at the back of me. 

"'"You should be in bed," I said. "Let us get a firm grip of the very little 
which we DO know, so that when fresh facts arise we may be ready to fit them 
into their places. After that, as you know, there can be no bad blood between 
us. Now, then the left hand on the apple of my throat. "  He resumed his 
unpleasant and stealthy advance, pointing his toes as he walked, like a dancing 
master. 

"A raw rat," the man of drugs was saying, "that is what it is ever my use to 
order for the plague--a raw rat with its paunch cut open. 

"I have just left him. 

She looked up at his dark, fierce face, and laughed saucily. Of the stores 
which remained below he was ordered to retain as much as would keep him for two 
months. His height is readily calculated from the length of his stride, and we 
know that he was bearded. K. , and why does he pursue this unhappy family?" 

Sherlock Holmes closed his eyes and placed his elbows upon the arms of his 
chair, with his finger-tips together. 

"This is a very singular knife," said Holmes, lifting it up and examining it 
minutely. 'You'll do. Come! Come!' 

"'What then?' I asked. 

"'Come, man, come, only three minutes, or it won't be legal. That would explain 
his persistence, would it not?" 

"Well, what is the next step?" 

"The next step is the note received by Garcia at the dinner. There was no one 
but Alec Fairbairn whose step she could have mistaken for mine. A most careful 
search had failed to discover it in the room. 

"Lend me your bull's-eye, sergeant," said my companion. 

"Good heavens! have you nothing to add?" cried Soames. There is just a field 
between us, but to reach it you have to go along the road and then turn down a 
lane. " 

"And where got you all these pretty things?" asked Hordle John, pointing at the 
heap in the corner. "It is said, though I can scarce bring myself to believe 
it, that they will send a ball twice as far as a bowman can shoot his shaft, 
and with such force as to break through armor of proof. Would you be asking me 
to break my oath?" 

"If that is the view you take," said Morris sadly, "I can only say that I am 
sorry I gave you the trouble to come and meet me. "My constitution has not got 
over the Afghan campaign yet. It broke his heart. Carruthers explained that the 
reason was that my uncle had just heard of the death of his brother, and so 
felt responsible for our fate. Every week-end I went home to my mother in town. 
At last, however, his foot came upon a broad resting-place and he ventured to 
cast a glance downwards. It is a quarter of an hour's walk from there to 
Appledore Towers. "Go to Baker Street at once," it said. "If I have not 
returned, wait for me. It's dooced interestin', and no mistake about that. " 

Five minutes later we were in the street, walking towards Regent's Circus. " 

"A fair shoot--a fair shoot! Stand aside, Arnaud, lest you find a bolt through 
your gizzard. That, however, I shall determine by a very simple test if we have 
an answer to our advertisement. From there I should explore every hut upon the 
moor until I lighted upon the right one. But, like all oft-repeated truths, it 
has in time lost something of its actuality and cogency. Who would have 
believed it? Who would have ever believed it?' He spoke in a jesting tone, but 
there was no jest in his eyes as he looked at me. 

"She broke away from your influence when she found the man that you are," said 
Holmes, sternly. " 

"There is no exit?" 

"None. "Take heed, I pray thee, for I do not wish to have a blight cast over 
me, nor a palsy of the limbs. Offer to assist them in every way. We shall wait 
here until your return. It was some distance off, where a winding passage leads 
to a great empty hall, the brick walls of which were all crumbling to pieces. ' 
 I shall be back in an hour. It was all done in an instant, and there was the 
gentleman thanking me on the one side and the lady on the other, while the 
clergyman beamed on me in front. But there might have been stains, and that 
would have helped us. Perchance it would be well that we should ask him whither 
he rides, for it may be that he is one who desires to advance himself in 
chivalry. Alleyne smiled as he wondered what fantastic and wondrous deed would 
be exacted from him. Swiftly as he went, however, he could not escape the curse 
of the four blessed evangelists which the mendicant howled behind him. At the 
end of an hour he was no further than when he started. With an ashen face the 
white-aproned host came running at his call, his hands shaking and his very 
hair bristling with apprehension. Under the royal banners rode many a bold 
Gascon baron and many a hot-blooded islander. As he approached he saw that they 
had five dried herrings laid out in front of them, with a great hunch of 
wheaten bread and a leathern flask full of milk, but instead of setting to at 
their food they appeared to have forgot all about it, and were disputing 
together with flushed faces and angry gestures. Jones's energy will be of use 
to us there, for his view of the case is sure to push itself into the daily 
press, and the runaways will think that every one is off on the wrong scent. " 

"What are we to do, then?" I asked, as we landed near Millbank Penitentiary. 
"Kindly summon your men, and I will try. " 

Five minutes later, three policemen had assembled in the hall. " 

"I am still in the dark. We can do nothing until seven o'clock. It only remains 
to follow the other. Two steps to the west meant now that I was to go two paces 
down the stone-flagged passage, and this was the place indicated by the Ritual. 
We ran forward into the open to meet our friends, and pressed a loaded rifle 
into the hands of each. There can be no doubt that the probability--the strong 
probability--is that the writer was on board of a ship. Yet there they sat, 
driven clean mad with terror, and Brenda lying dead of fright, with her head 
hanging over the arm of the chair. " 

"You travel much then!" 

"To Winchester, Linn mart, Bristol fair, Stourbridge, and Bartholomew's in 
London Town. " 

"I fail to see that anyone is to blame. Then he clambered up to the rim of the 
hollow, and crawled about among the ferns and bushes. " 

"Whom do you suspect?" 

"Oh, I would not venture to say, sir. I didn't hear no one else. At last I got 
clear, but by the time I had opened the door and reached the house the creature 
was gone. I had always known that vengeance would be sweet, but I had never 
hoped for the contentment of soul which now possessed me. I saw the signal 
clear enough, and yet I couldn't tell you why. ' 

"'Now that shows real application!' he cried. 

"'Next Monday I have a large sum due to me, and I shall then most certainly 
repay what you advance, with whatever interest you think it right to charge. 
"Pretty doin's!  What!" he cried, as we descended the station hill at 
Rotherfield, and it was still "Pretty doin's!  What!" as we picked our way 
through a wilderness of death in the High Street of Lewisham and the Old Kent 
Road. 

It was here that we received a sudden and amazing shock. 

"'Well, you certainly touched upon rather a tender point. m. ' Now my theory 
all along has been that Lady St. I gave her a check, and I never thought any 
more of the matter. I heard her voice downstairs, but I knew that she could not 
ascend. 

"It was a long document, written in the French language, and containing 
twenty-six separate articles. "The colours are just light itself. " 

She gave a gasp, and her head dropped back in the chair. But are there none in 
all England who love thee?" 

"None that I dare say so. " 

"Not a soul," groaned Hall Pycroft. He waited in vain for some backward glance 
or sign of relenting, but she walked on with a rigid neck until her dress was 
only a white flutter among the leaves. " 

I knew already that Sir Charles Baskerville had made Stapleton his almoner upon 
several occasions, so the lady's statement bore the impress of truth upon it. 
Melas. A gentleman had just called for him, and he was gone. " 

"But why would you not let me near you, since there was in truth no infection?" 

"Can you ask, my dear Watson?  Do you imagine that I have no respect for your 
medical talents?  Could I fancy that your astute judgment would pass a dying 
man who, however weak, had no rise of pulse or temperature?  At four yards, I 
could deceive you. 

"What is this, Holmes?" I cried. We could not leave her lying wounded upon the 
floor. I hardly looked at his face. Do try to bring him. My first feeling of 
fear had passed away, and I thrilled now with a keener zest than I had ever 
enjoyed when we were the defenders of the law instead of its defiers. This must 
be the burrow where the stranger lurked. Where is that friend or enemy now? Has 
he remained in London, or has he followed us down here? Could he--could he be 
the stranger whom I saw upon the tor? 

It is true that I have had only the one glance at him, and yet there are some 
things to which I am ready to swear. " 

"On the contrary, I have been to Devonshire. He put less weight upon it. 

"It is paper of native Indian manufacture," he remarked. "Like all such tribes, 
I shall expect to find them of poly-synthetic speech and of Mongolian type. " 

"Polysynthetic certainly," said Challenger, indulgently. Not more than is usual 
in my family. But the gem of my collection is coming and there is the setting 
all ready for it. There's the devilish cunning of it! If he were acting through 
a human agent we could get some evidence, but if we were to drag this great dog 
to the light of day it would not help us in putting a rope round the neck of 
its master. But he has never let us get together and it was only today for the 
first time that I saw a chance of having a few words with her alone. He rushed 
down, just as he was, in his bare feet, opened the window, sprang out into the 
snow, and ran down the lane, where he could see a dark figure in the moonlight. 
A couple of small plane trees stood in the corner of the yard, and underneath 
them lay several pathetic little balls of fluffy feathers, with tiny feet 
uplifted. Without, the sun shines bright and the birds are singing amid the ivy 
on the drooping beeches. Their choice is made, and they turn away hand-in-hand, 
with their backs to the darkness and their faces to the light. 

And a fearsome sight it was that met their eyes! Across the lower end lay the 
dense heap of men and horses where the first arrow-storm had burst. "The mire 
has him. Would you think me impertinent if I were to put your theories to a 
more severe test?" 

"On the contrary," he answered, "it would prevent me from taking a second dose 
of cocaine. Every vein and crack and mottling of that face of rock remained 
forever stamped upon his memory. I tried to read, but my thoughts would wander 
off to our strange quest and to the ill-assorted and villainous pair whom we 
were pursuing. " 

"We have had enough bobance and boasting," said Hordle John, rising and 
throwing off his doublet. "I think, your Grace, that this can only be done by 
absolute frankness between us. It ran 'Please, please, as you are a gentleman, 
burn this letter, and be at the gate by ten o'clock. 

"My first conjecture was, that possibly there had been some passages between 
this young lady and the old soldier, which the former had now confessed to the 
wife. "I'm bringing home the bacon at last. " 

"Well, I started from the fact that Mr. " 

"There are none. " 

"That is easily managed. Hardly had we reached the dark shadows before the step 
of the policeman was heard in the fog above. When the account of the railway 
and shipping accidents has been completed, it will furnish grim reading, 
although there is evidence to show that in the vast majority of cases the 
drivers of trains and engineers of steamers succeeded in shutting off their 
motive power before succumbing to the poison. " 

"No, no. "Have I not given to the common fund? Have I not attended at the 
Temple? Have I not----?" 

"Where are your wives?" asked Young, looking round him. 

"And good?" 

"As an angel. I am the reporter of the Daily Gazette. Holmes, when she married 
again so soon after father's death, and a man who was nearly fifteen years 
younger than herself. " 

"Still looking for your boot?" 

"Yes, sir, and mean to find it. Listen now!  Can you remember any unusual 
incident in your life just about the time your symptoms began?" 

"No, no; nothing. " 

"Think again. But now, before we part, I want you to write a note to Mr. They 
had gagged me, and Murillo twisted my arm round until I gave him the address. 
Besides, neither of them could possibly have known that there was anything more 
valuable than the ordinary departmental papers in my despatch-box. ' 

"'On your head be it, Alice!' cried her mother; and then, turning to me, 'I 
will tell you all, sir. In an instant it was obvious that we had at last come 
upon the true place, and that we had not been the only people to visit the spot 
recently. Even the babies were as big as elephants, while the two large ones 
were far beyond all creatures I have ever seen. 

We were able now to take a more leisurely view of the Indians whom we had 
rescued. "What are your questions?" 

"Did you correspond with Sir Charles?" 

"I certainly wrote to him once or twice to acknowledge his delicacy and his 
generosity. Across his thighs was a wooden board, and scattered over it all 
manner of slips of wood and knobs of brick and stone, each laid separate from 
the other, as a huckster places his wares. Only for one instant did the master 
spy glare at this strangely irrelevant inscription. The outer door would not 
open to our knock, and nothing more substantial than a torrent of bad language 
came from behind it. He meant in the end to have the estate, and he was ready 
to use any tool or run any risk for that end. I am told that he was an 
excellent cyclist. Sir Henry and Dr. " 

"Of course you know the legend of the fiend dog which haunts the family?" 

"I have heard it. His hopes and his ambitions were all crumbling about him. It 
was clear to me at a glance that he was in the grip of some deadly and chronic 
disease. 

"Whatever it is, I can swear that it is of importance to us," said I. Mortimer 
in answer to my friend's questions. 

"I don't know much about the tariff and things of that kind," said he, "but it 
seems to me we've got a bit off the trail so far as that note is concerned. 
"What are you doing there?" 

"Why, Mr. "Am I to be preached to by a child?" he cried, staring across at 
Alleyne with an inflamed and angry countenance. Hudson has made some change in 
that figure eight times, or once in every quarter of an hour. A few minutes 
later she brought in three covers, and we all drew up to the table, Holmes 
ravenous, I curious, and Phelps in the gloomiest state of depression. 

"Ah! camarade," he cried, "you shall have a stoup with me for this! What then, 
old dog, would not the hawk please thee, but thou must have the stork as well. 
Leslie Armstrong is certainly a man of energy and character," said he. "I have 
not seen a man who, if he turns his talents that way, was more calculated to 
fill the gap left by the illustrious Moriarty. " 

The old knight said no word, but he put a hand on either shoulder, and kissed 
his squire, with the tears shining in his eyes. A very different Holmes, this 
active, alert man, from the introspective and pallid dreamer of Baker Street. I 
came up even as the seneschal's archers were tying him up, and I gave him my 
fore-word that I would bide with him until he had passed. " 

"At what time?" 

"Ten will be early enough. 

"Oh, that! I thought of the salt that I have been working upon. " 

"No, no," I answered, "not to me, but to my friend Sherlock Holmes. A minute 
later came the shaggy deer-hounds, a dozen or fourteen of them, running on a 
hot scent, with nose to earth and tail in air. It was Captain Marvin, once of 
Chicago, and now of the Mine Constabulary. There have been further and sinister 
developments in the investigation at Norwood. When the house is renovated and 
refurnished, all that he will need will be a wife to make it complete. There 
was no sign or trace of his passenger, and I fear it will be some time before 
he gets his fare. . . . . Within a day or so at the furthest. Inscribed upon 
it, in the jagged handwriting of Professor Challenger, were the words:-- 



"Instructions to Lord John Roxton and party. To be opened at Manaos upon July 
15th, at 12 o'clock precisely. " 

The bowman shook his head. " 

"When do the servants go to bed?" 

"About ten. " 

"Well, of course, that is possible also. "I had not thought of that. It is not 
for me to open my mouth, Mr. What could he practice on? My eyes fell upon the 
sheep, and I asked a question which, rather to my surprise, showed that my 
surmise was correct. 

At seven o'clock that evening we were walking, the three of us, down 
Corporation Street to the company's offices. Near the door I saw the gleam of 
an electric switch, but it was unnecessary, even if it had been safe, to turn 
it on. 

This was a lofty chamber, lined and littered with countless bottles. I hope to 
heaven that he has gone, for he has brought nothing but trouble here! I've not 
heard of him since I left out food for him last, and that was three days ago. I 
absolutely refuse to leave, however, until we have made at least a superficial 
examination of this country, and are able to take back with us something in the 
nature of a chart. This, however, is beside the question, Mr. But, indeed, I 
have little doubt that we can build up a sufficient case without it. By Jove! 
my dear fellow, it is nearly nine, and the landlady babbled of green peas at 
seven-thirty. " 

An elderly, clean-shaved man with a kindly face and a good brow rose from the 
end of the table which faced the chairman. Meanwhile, come on, McMurdo, and 
come quietly if you don't want a gun across your head. " 

The traces of the tragedy had been removed, but the furniture within the little 
room still stood as it had been on the night of the crime. Her face was haggard 
and thin and eager, stamped with the print of a recent horror. The prayer 
finished, they resumed their seat in the shadow of the boulder until the child 
fell asleep, nestling upon the broad breast of her protector. It may be that 
they cannot, but it may also be that they will not, help us to get away. Down 
the centre of Baker Street it had been ploughed into a brown crumbly band by 
the traffic, but at either side and on the heaped-up edges of the foot-paths it 
still lay as white as when it fell. Amid a thunder of cheering from cog and 
from galleys the forked pennon fluttered upon the forecastle, and the galley, 
sweeping round, came slowly back, as the slaves who rowed it learned the wishes 
of their new masters. 

The two knights had come aboard the cog, and the grapplings having been thrown 
off, the three vessels now moved abreast. Thaddeus Sholto, as he handed her 
out. 







The Tragedy of Pondicherry Lodge 

It was nearly eleven o'clock when we reached this final stage of our night's 
adventures. Watson, that's not you, is it? You are the last man that I should 
have expected to see out on the moor at this time of night. " 

"It is a privilege to be associated with you in the handling of a case," said 
the inspector, warmly. "Come, Watson, for we have a good day's work before us 
in town. " 

We scrambled from rock to rock, until in a few moments we had made our way to a 
point from which we could see the front door of the inn. Well, it only meant 
that we waited half an hour or so until I saw your lamp go out and knew that 
the coast was clear. They rapidly and rather clumsily met the situation. They 
call them many names, and they rule them this way or that but they are all 
English, for I can hear the voices of the people. 

"They chose us because neither I nor the boy here drink," Lawler explained. 
John, cooped up in the valley, and absorbed in his work, had had little chance 
of learning the news of the outside world during the last twelve years. Yet 
ignorance may be more precious than wisdom, for Alleyne as he walked on braced 
himself to a higher life by the thought of this other's sacrifice, and 
strengthened himself by his example which he could scarce have done had he 
known that the Hospitaller's mind ran more upon malmsey than on Mamelukes, and 
on venison rather than victories. What do we find? A few cattle-tracks, nothing 
more. They camp before a great city, and the base burghers come forth with the 
keys, and then they make great spoil; or, if it please them better, they take 
so many horse-loads of silver as a composition; and so they journey on from 
state to state, rich and free and feared by all. Then I was surer than ever 
that it was just paper talk; for I found no harm in the society, but a deal of 
good. From crime to crime he sank lower and lower until it is only the mercy of 
God which has snatched him from the scaffold; but to me, sir, he was always the 
little curly-headed boy that I had nursed and played with as an elder sister 
would. That angular shadow up yonder was the bait, and we were the hunters. " 

"But he begs you to help him. I have heard your name mentioned in connection 
with that of your friend. " 

"It surprised me. I had brought a pack of cards in my pocket, and I thought 
that, as we were a partie carrée, you might have your rubber after all. Seat 
thee upon the settle, Alleyne, for you may need rest ere long. " 

The youth sat down as directed, but reluctantly and with diffidence. The tracks 
of the tire began to curve fantastically upon the wet and shining path. " 

"Why, of course, that would explain it. We may in our humble way do something 
to make things more easy for him until he becomes accustomed to his new 
surroundings. 

"We are going well," said he, looking out the window and glancing at his watch. 
" As he spoke he unwrapped the grey shawl and extricated a pretty little girl 
of about five years of age, whose dainty shoes and smart pink frock with its 
little linen apron all bespoke a mother's care. The first time that I ever 
heard my comrade Black Simon laugh was in front of that door. It struck me as 
rather ingenious, because it might be read by the fugitives without their 
seeing in it more than the natural anxiety of a wife for her missing husband. 
To some of the elders it seemed that the progress was a little too rapid. Yet, 
with scarce an hour of rest, Sir Nigel was as blithe and bright as ever as they 
set forth after breakfast upon their way. George, I was able to sit my charger 
in the ruffle of Poictiers, which was no very long time afterwards. A meeting 
of the Guild had been held that evening at eight, and Mrs. Alleyne sat up on 
his couch with all his nerves in a tingle, uncertain whether these sounds might 
come from a simple cause--some sick archer and visiting leech perhaps--or 
whether they might have a more sinister meaning. From above it seemed as though 
rope and cliff were well-nigh touching, but now, when swinging a hundred feet 
down, the squire found that he could scarce reach the face of the rock with his 
foot, and that it was as smooth as glass, with no resting-place where a mouse 
could stand. 

McMurdo strolled up the winding path hedged in with evergreens until he reached 
the deserted restaurant which forms the centre of summer gaiety. But you have 
one quality which is very rare in a German, Mr. Very good. Beneath its shade 
there sat a stout and elderly lady in a pink cote-hardie, leaning back among a 
pile of cushions, and plucking out her eyebrows with a small pair of silver 
tweezers. The great black tower upon which they stood rose like a last island 
of refuge amid this sea of fire but the ominous crackling and roaring below 
showed that it would not be long ere it was engulfed also in the common ruin. I 
therefore cabled to my friend, Wilson Hargreave, of the New York Police Bureau, 
who has more than once made use of my knowledge of London crime. But I cared a 
great deal for the much more formidable person who was behind him, the bosom 
friend of Moriarty, the man who dropped the rocks over the cliff, the most 
cunning and dangerous criminal in London. They found her afterwards by her own 
hearthstone, thrust through by a Frenchman's bill. So did I, but I got in three 
carriages behind them. And yet the idea struck a chill to the most reckless of 
them. For three or four minutes on end the fearsome duet continued, while all 
the foliage rustled with the rising of startled birds. " 

"You reasoned it out beautifully," I exclaimed in unfeigned admiration. But it 
is too heavy a task. One of them gave a deep rumbling groan and dropped his 
huge squat head on to the earth. But how now, Robin? Whom is it that you seek?" 

"The Lord Loring craves your attendance in his tent," said a young archer to 
Alleyne. Holmes?" 

"I hardly understand your Grace. 

"Yes, Baynes, I've seen it. "How can he see the guiding wands tonight? We 
planted them together, he and I, to mark the pathway through the mire. It was a 
favorite ditty of the late lamented Professor Moriarty. The French or the 
Russian embassy would pay an immense sum to learn the contents of these papers. 
Barrymore had returned from taking our luggage to our rooms. " 

It seemed hopeless to pursue the inquiry any farther, but it was clear that in 
spite of Holmes's ruse we had no proof that Barrymore had not been in London 
all the time. In a quarter of an hour, we shall be at your service. " 

Mr. That is where old Mrs. Yet what knight was there in that hall of St. So!" 
He threw himself down upon his pallet and in an instant was fast asleep. 

It might have been about three o'clock in the morning when Alleyne was aroused 
from a troubled sleep by a low cry or exclamation. His initials were inside it. 
His figure was erect and soldierly, and he rode his horse with the careless 
grace of a man whose life had been spent in the saddle. He locked the door and 
hurried past me without a word or a look. 

"Do you see anything there?" 

I looked at the broad plumed hat, the curling love-locks, the white lace 
collar, and the straight, severe face which was framed between them. HOLMES : 

"I will go no further in this matter. He then led the way inside, and went over 
the whole building from basement to attic. I was sorry for him and I came. " 

We found, however, as we advanced that this portion of the moor is intersected 
with soft patches, and, though we frequently lost sight of the track, we always 
succeeded in picking it up once more. Still, he has been justified of his 
wisdom up to date, at any rate, since he has not been taken. She has heard of 
you, and would have your opinion, though I repeatedly told her that there was 
nothing which you could do which I had not already done. She little guessed the 
struggle within my breast, or the effort of self-restraint which held me back. 
Stapleton himself seems to have been capable of jealousy, and when he saw the 
baronet paying court to the lady, even though it was part of his own plan, 
still he could not help interrupting with a passionate outburst which revealed 
the fiery soul which his self-contained manner so cleverly concealed. " 

"My difficulty is the more formidable of the two, for I think that we shall 
very shortly get an explanation of yours, while mine may remain forever a 
mystery. "My, it might be a description of Watson!" 

"It's true," said the inspector, with amusement. "It might be a description of 
Watson. "If that is gone I may as well go too. It's dooced interestin', and no 
mistake about that. Whatever they do, they will have followers. Her story got 
about, and several of the people here did something to enable her to earn an 
honest living. 

"About ten minutes later a knock came at the door, and here we made the one 
serious mistake for which I blame myself. "You don't expect such energy from 
me, do you, Sherlock? But somehow this case attracts me. " 

"And the place?" 

"The tilting-yard is empty at this hour. " 

"And why no arrest? It's past two now. 

"Yes," I said, "it is morally justifiable so long as our object is to take no 
articles save those which are used for an illegal purpose. They have their own 
way. Indeed, I have found that it is usually in unimportant matters that there 
is a field for the observation, and for the quick analysis of cause and effect 
which gives the charm to an investigation. " 

"No doubt. "I'm bound to say this bears out your theory, Mr. Oh, man, it's just 
inconceivable! It's clean against common sense! I put it to you, Mr. " 

"We must be circumspect, for we are dealing with a very cunning man. 

"From Spain, say you? Ah! it was an ill and sorry thing that so many should 
throw away the lives that Heaven gave them. He has rushed about the moor in a 
crazy state and eventually fallen over here and broken his neck. They certainly 
confirm the very high opinion which I had formed of his abilities. One by one 
the poor devils have to jump, and the game is to see whether they are merely 
dashed to pieces or whether they get skewered on the canes. 

"'You blackguard!' I shouted, beside myself with rage. "Listen to this: 

"It is satisfactory to know that there can be no difference of opinion upon 
this case, since Mr. Lestrade, one of the most experienced members of the 
official force, and Mr. One morning a young girl called, fashionably dressed, 
and stayed for half an hour or more. The other belonged to the dining-room, 
which was the apartment in which the mysterious affair had occurred. The case 
of Frankland v. 

Mr. "You seem heeled and ready. "You are the wrong sort for such work. I shall 
be busy this afternoon, and shall probably return to London by the evening 
train. It might not even now be too late to overtake him, so I set off at once 
in the direction of Merripit House. A reference to the passenger list showed 
that Miss Fraser, of Adelaide, with her maid had made the voyage in her. 

"Well?" he asked. "It was a train of the living when it left Victoria, but it 
was driven and freighted by the dead long before it reached its fate. I know 
all about McCarthy. He would show me how to turn the stone into money. Now he 
suddenly turned himself sideways, and all I could see of him was tangled hair 
with a red, protruding ear. What is the chief difference?" 

"Your toes are all cramped together. I am afraid he won't make much of  Why, by 
Jove, here's the very man himself!" 

It was indeed Lestrade, who had ascended the stairs while we were talking, and 
who now entered the room. Would that annoy you?" 

"By no means. Hosmer Angel?" 

I held the little printed slip to the light. " 

"Why did you come away to consult me in such a hurry?" asked Sherlock Holmes, 
with his finger-tips together and his eyes to the ceiling. White Mason, to our 
going down to the house at once? There may possibly be some small point which 
might be suggestive. Holmes and his methods were new to him. You hope to place 
me in the dock. "I did write it. " 

"So I shall, Miss Cushing. He had risen to his feet, and his eyes glowed like 
embers. Six plaster casts of Napoleon were drying in the passage. I have held 
two and twenty towns, and I have been at the intaking of thirty-one. 

"It was a long document, written in the French language, and containing 
twenty-six separate articles. Mortimer in answer to my friend's questions. The 
two of them were destined to travel together round the world before Sir Henry 
had become once more the hale, hearty man that he had been before he became 
master of that ill-omened estate. Jonathan Small did not get the treasure 
because he and his associates were themselves convicts and could not get away. 
He was quite sharp enough to see that. "This is a most extraordinary case," he 
said at last--"a most incomprehensible affair. 

"Ha! you find it so?" 

"Extremely so. He was dressed from head to foot in a long white linen cloth, 
and a high white cap with a red cross printed upon it. 

"I should like to have a peep at each of them," said Holmes. " 

"You have it, sir, just as it happened. In spite of his capacity for concealing 
his emotions, I could easily see that Holmes was in a state of suppressed 
excitement, while I was myself tingling with that half-sporting, 
half-intellectual pleasure which I invariably experienced when I associated 
myself with him in his investigations. There are seventy-five perfumes, which 
it is very necessary that a criminal expert should be able to distinguish from 
each other, and cases have more than once within my own experience depended 
upon their prompt recognition. Don Diego, you know the arms of your own land. 
Who are they who have done us this honor?" 

The Spanish prisoner looked with exultant eyes upon the deep and serried ranks 
of his countrymen. " 

"Lord Holdhurst!" 

"Well, it is just conceivable that a statesman might find himself in a position 
where he was not sorry to have such a document accidentally destroyed. The 
whole garden has already been minutely examined. She was preparing to go to bed 
when the loud ringing of the bell had attracted her attention. " 

"You don't associate his past with any particular part of America?" 

"I have heard him talk of Chicago. Remember that she comes of a caste who do 
not lightly show emotion. Of that you may be assured. If an original were 
missing they would change the whole thing. The fame of your wealth has gone 
abroad, Lord Mount-James, and it is entirely possible that a gang of thieves 
have secured your nephew in order to gain from him some information as to your 
house, your habits, and your treasure. 

But the islanders were ready and eager for the encounter. Alleyne, however, had 
the good fortune to fall in with a woodman, axe upon shoulder, trudging along 
in the very direction that he wished to go. To the right Sir Oliver, Aylward, 
Hordle John, and the bowmen of the Company fought furiously against the monkish 
Knights of Santiago, who were led up the hill by their prior--a great, 
deep-chested man, who wore a brown monastic habit over his suit of mail. I 
don't care about knuckling under to any man, as these folk do to their darned 
prophet. 

"I have no doubt of it at all," said I. The roses of Loring and the boar's head 
of Buttesthorn may stand back in peace, but by my faith! they are not to be 
held back in war. Last night was also wet, you will remember, and it was not 
difficult--having obtained a sample print--to pick out his track among others 
and to follow his movements. But where will-power and intellect go together, 
there is always a way out. Yet, by St. George before the gates of Paris. When 
all was completed and the muster called in the castle yard the oldest soldier 
of the French wars was fain to confess that he had never looked upon a better 
equipped or more warlike body of men, from the old knight with his silk jupon, 
sitting his great black war-horse in the front of them, to Hordle John, the 
giant recruit, who leaned carelessly upon a huge black bow-stave in the rear. " 

"Is he your junior?" 

"Seven years my senior. A light, Giacomo! There are five steps up. 

"Well?" asked Von Bork eagerly, running forward to meet his visitor. Holmes," 
said he, tartly. "I have been expecting you to do something original. " 

"My dear fellow, you have been invaluable to me in this as in many other cases, 
and I beg that you will forgive me if I have seemed to play a trick upon you. I 
always thought him sane enough until today, but you can take it from me that 
either he or I ought to be in a straitjacket. This, then, is the way by which 
Number One entered. It 

chanced that this Hugo came to love (if, indeed, so dark 

a passion may be known under so bright a name) the daughter 

of a yeoman who held lands near the Baskerville estate. He will be here in an 
hour. He has little time, for he has heard the scuffle downstairs when the wife 
tried to force her way up, and perhaps he has already heard from his Lascar 
confederate that the police are hurrying up the street. We live very quietly, 
sir, the three of us; and we keep a roof over our heads and pay our debts, if 
we do nothing more. ' 

"'Where to?' 

"'To Eyford, in Berkshire. The more I looked at his fat, frightened face, the 
harder did it seem that we should slay him in cold blood. 

"This promises to be a most interesting and unusual case," said he. 











(_Being a reprint from the reminiscences of_ JOHN H. 

"I arrest you on the charge of the murder of one Victor Savage," he concluded. 
"No London Times was published this morning. First of all, I wish you to 
understand that nothing I tell you now is to be repeated in any public way 
unless you have my express permission. He certainly died from a revolver wound 
as reported. Appreciation of nature found no place among his many gifts, and 
his only change was when he turned his mind from the evil-doer of the town to 
track down his brother of the country. 

Finding that Holmes was too absorbed for conversation, I had tossed aside the 
barren paper, and leaning back in my chair, I fell into a brown study. Of 
course you observed the peculiarly square toes in the impressions, and that his 
own boots exactly corresponded to them. At dawn and at sunset the howler 
monkeys screamed together and the parrakeets broke into shrill chatter, but 
during the hot hours of the day only the full drone of insects, like the beat 
of a distant surf, filled the ear, while nothing moved amid the solemn vistas 
of stupendous trunks, fading away into the darkness which held us in. On a 
certain evening, which had been prearranged, I sent my friend final 
instructions, for the man was forever on the alert and continually changed his 
room. ' 

"'But why did you stand all this,' I asked. " 

"Indeed," said Holmes. "Who is without them? Your going forth is a grief to us 
as well as to yourself. Harris, of Bermondsey, and the other is Mr. Price, of 
this town," said our clerk, glibly. "They are friends of mine and gentlemen of 
experience, but they have been out of a place for some little time, and they 
hoped that perhaps you might find an opening for them in the company's 
employment. Shoot straight and hard, archers; for, by St. " 

"Bethink you, then," said Sir Claude, "that you go under a hard rule, with 
neither freedom nor pleasure--and for what? For sixpence a day, at the most; 
while now you may walk across the country and stretch out either hand to gather 
in whatever you have a mind for. As I passed the tall man who sat by the 
brazier I felt a sudden pluck at my skirt, and a low voice whispered, "Walk 
past me, and then look back at me. Just as I arrived the door was opened, and 
we were shown up together to Holmes' room. 

A dozen motor-buses towered up like islands in this flood, the passengers who 
crowded the roofs lying all huddled together and across each others' laps like 
a child's toys in a nursery. "You can wait, Austin. " 

Summerlee groaned. Her husband developed some hateful qualities; or shall we 
say that he contracted some loathsome disease, and became a leper or an 
imbecile? She flies from him at last, returns to England, changes her name, and 
starts her life, as she thinks, afresh. That questioning gaze transformed 
itself suddenly into abrupt speech. " 

"Well?" 

"You can plan the rest for yourselves. Sir Charles's generosity has given us 
the means to do so. 

"They tell me, bowmen," said he, "that ye have grown so fond of ease and 
plunder and high living that ye are not to be moved from this pleasant country. 
Allen. As to the other servants, they had all gone to bed, and the alarm did 
not reach them until just before the police arrived. There is a gentle hum of 
life which pervades a closely-settled country, so deep and constant that one 
ceases to observe it, as the dweller by the sea loses all sense of the constant 
murmur of the waves. Of these, one, the 'Lone Star,' instantly attracted my 
attention, since, although it was reported as having cleared from London, the 
name is that which is given to one of the states of the Union. He bowed me out, 
and I found myself in the street, hardly knowing whether I was on my head or my 
heels. I looked back before I reached Farnham, but the man was gone, so I 
thought no more about it. He could climb like a cat, and he soon made his way 
through the roof, but, as ill luck would have it, Bartholomew Sholto was still 
in the room, to his cost. 

"I never hope to see such a sight as that again, Mr. 

"Here are your reports, my dear fellow, and very well thumbed, I assure you. He 
was the favorite son, you know, and I sometimes think that my father may have 
told him more than he ever told me. I tell you that. "When does he lunch?" 

"About one, sir. " 

"You'll see prettier things than them soon," said the man confidently. It has 
eased my joints, which were somewhat stiff from these years of peace. Its 
general shape was that of a shallow funnel, all the sides sloping down to a 
considerable lake in the center. It had sprung from the perch and was circling 
slowly round the Queen's Hall with a dry, leathery flapping of its ten-foot 
wings, while a putrid and insidious odor pervaded the room. I say 'criminal' 
because only a man with a criminal enterprise desires to establish an alibi. He 
now took the stick from my hands and examined it for a few minutes with his 
naked eyes. 

"I'm not much of a visitor, Brother McMurdo," he said at last. "If the world 
has undergone this experience before, which is not outside the range of 
possibility, it was certainly a very long time ago. " 

A minute later, the grim doctor and ourselves were in the sitting-room below. 
"Here he is," said he, sitting down and flattening it out upon his knee. I give 
it you briefly:-- 

"'Challenger, George Edward. " 

We sat in silence for a moment. " 

"I am very glad if I have helped you. But I got nothing out of him--nothing for 
publication. " 

"I dare say not, the leetle baggage! Perhaps she did not vish to frighten you 
avay. It was evident that to his intensely aristocratic nature this discussion 
of his intimate family affairs with a stranger was most abhorrent, and that he 
feared lest every fresh question would throw a fiercer light into the 
discreetly shadowed corners of his ducal history. The last of these, at 
Folkestone Court, in May, was remarkable for the cold-blooded pistolling of the 
page, who surprised the masked and solitary burglar. This way, gentlemen, if 
you please. He was reminded of his omission, however, by a visit one evening 
from Mike Scanlan, the fellow member whom he had met in the train. 

"You have probably never heard of Professor Moriarty?" said he. I was James 
Armitage in my younger days, and you can understand now the shock that it was 
to me a few weeks ago when your college friend addressed me in words which 
seemed to imply that he had surprised my secret. " 

"You have been up to the scene of the crime, I understand," said the Colonel. 
"Come, let us spring for it. " The two youths jumped with all their strength to 
reach the departing galley. 

"It was in the early mornin'. "We have touched on three English counties in our 
short drive, starting in Middlesex, passing over an angle of Surrey, and ending 
in Kent. " 

"Very likely not. " 

"There are considerable difficulties both ways, and yet one or the other it 
must be. "This unexpected occurrence," he said, "has caused us rather to lose 
sight of the original purpose of our journey. "I wired to Bristol for it last 
night. " 

"There are pigments, brush, and paper," said the old artist. I could read it 
from thy reddened cheek and downcast eye. It was death to the man that lost his 
grip. 

Miss Morstan was muffled in a dark cloak, and her sensitive face was composed, 
but pale. 'Punishment has been slow in coming, but it has overtaken you at 
last. ' I saw his coward lips tremble as I spoke. 'There is a God in heaven, 
Mr. 'I perceive that all is as it should be. ' 

"The instant that I uttered the words I regretted the rashness of my speech. ' 

"'Possibly four or five?' 

"'Yes. ' 

"'You have visited Japan. The more I looked at his fat, frightened face, the 
harder did it seem that we should slay him in cold blood. As to the small ruse 
which I played upon you in the matter of the envelope, it is clear that, had I 
told you all my intentions, I should have been forced to resist unwelcome 
pressure to travel out with you. For an instant I imagined that I had left my 
own there, but on feeling in my pocket I found that it was all right. Then they 
were lost among the bushes. 

"By the way," said he, "man does not live upon oxygen alone. " 

"He was a bachelor, you say?" 

"A widower. " 

"Never mind the reward. Holmes walked over to his desk, took out a little 
triangular piece of gold with three gems in it, and threw it down upon the 
table. M. A. This is quite natural. When I had made it clear to them, I 
returned to the main chamber of the machine and took a good look at it to 
satisfy my own curiosity. I waited in an agony of suspense until she came back 
with her report. He entered with a weariness and lethargy which was even more 
painful than his violence of the morning before, and he dropped heavily into 
the armchair which I pushed forward for him. It is that the chief proof of 
man's real greatness lies in his perception of his own smallness. Yet here it 
was that the will of a great prince had now assembled a gallant army; so that 
from the Adour to the passes of Navarre the barren valleys and wind-swept 
wastes were populous with soldiers and loud with the shouting of orders and the 
neighing of horses. I am told that at Calais they made dints in the wall that a 
man might put his head into. How CAN Mr. How the Yellow Cog sailed forth from 
Lepe XVI. Barnicot's, and one smashed in broad daylight on my own counter. Do I 
know that photograph? No, I don't. " 

"Ho! for Sir Samkin Aylward!" cried a rough voice among the archers, and a roar 
of laughter greeted their new leader. "By my hilt! mon gar. " 

"Certainly, sir," said Baker, who had risen and tucked his newly gained 
property under his arm. You said, 'I desire to possess a copy of Devine's 
Napoleon, and am prepared to pay you ten pounds for the one which is in your 
possession. What is the case?" 

"You shall hear it all in the train. All the rest of the night I tossed and 
tumbled, framing theory after theory, each more unlikely than the last. My 
sister asked me what was the matter, and why I was so pale; but I told her that 
I had been upset by the jewel robbery at the hotel. I packed my things, banged 
the hall door behind me, and set off for Esher, with my bag in my hand. The 
first night he was reasonable enough, and was ready to give me what would make 
me free of the sea for life. So far, there was little to choose betwixt 
challengers and challenged. 

It was not the father, however, who first discovered that the child had 
developed into the woman. I was a harum-scarum, reckless lad, and he had had an 
education, and was already marked for the sword-belt. C. is happiest then. The 
organization is patent and public. Yet the long journey and the accumulated 
terrors had shaken the hearts of the stoutest among them. Yet they had still 
the human gift of speech, and would take council among themselves in their 
brushwood hovels, glaring with bleared eyes and pointing with thin fingers at 
the great widespread chateaux which ate like a cancer into the life of the 
country-side. " 

"There can be no manner of doubt about it," said Sir Oliver Buttesthorn. Dr. 
Huxtable had sent a telegram. I should like to have this confirmed from your 
own lips. Here's a letter that I had from him yesterday. Make a note of the 
address, 126b Corporation Street, and remember that one o'clock to-morrow is 
your appointment. Will confirm by advertisement. Summerlee, the veteran 
Professor of Comparative Anatomy, rose among the audience, a tall, thin, bitter 
man, with the withered aspect of a theologian. E. D. Malone, he looks trained 
to a hair, and as he surveyed the crowd a smile of good-humored contentment 
pervaded his honest but homely face. 

I thanked him. " 

Long were the faces of the Englishmen and broad the laugh of the crossbowmen as 
the heavy mantlet was carried towards them, for there in the centre was the 
thick Brabant bolt driven deeply into the wood, while there was neither sign 
nor trace of the cloth-yard shaft. " 

He looked at me with doubt in his insolent eyes. " 

"You will tell him that you want to see the waste-paper of yesterday. " 

"Quite true, Watson. 

"Oh, you think so?" 

"Don't you?" 

"Well, it is quite possible, but the case is not clear to me yet. Holmes, the 
crime was only committed at three this morning. I feel sure that if Sir Charles 
could have spoken with me before his death he would have warned me against 
bringing this, the last of the old race, and the heir to great wealth, to that 
deadly place. I staggered to the balustrades of the stair. We can compare notes 
afterwards, and each will supplement the other. After a long and weary journey, 
we alighted at a small station some miles from Chatham. A white mule with red 
trappings, led by a varlet, carried Sir Nigel's own napery and table comforts. 
" 

"That won't do, my dear Watson," said Holmes, shaking his head, "for no amount 
of IDEE FIXE would enable your interesting monomaniac to find out where these 
busts were situated. 

"See now," he continued, as he filled three high glasses. 'E's a very clever 
man, the master--so clever that 'e's clean balmy sometimes. I've seen 'im right 
off 'is onion, and no error. You're welcome to them--you and your public. I 
think I'll go. 

"Tonga--for that was his name--was a fine boatman, and owned a big, roomy canoe 
of his own. Heavy and slow is he by nature, and is not to be brought into 
battle for the sake of a lady's eyelash or the twang of a minstrel's string, 
like the hotter blood of the south. But ma foi! lay hand on his wool-bales, or 
trifle with his velvet of Bruges, and out buzzes every stout burgher, like bees 
from the tee-hole, ready to lay on as though it were his one business in life. 
It is all full of great deserted halls, and winding passages, and long 
corridors twisting in and out, so that it is easy enough for folk to get lost 
in it. Mortimer, stood high above the rest. Mortimer started violently. The 
vicar, being a bachelor, was glad to come to such an arrangement, though he had 
little in common with his lodger, who was a thin, dark, spectacled man, with a 
stoop which gave the impression of actual, physical deformity. 



Here end the notes which I made at the time. " 

"Nay, it is not for honor that I go, Nigel. "Do you think that a cavalier's arm 
is to be bought like a packman's ware. Joseph will come, too. " 

"And I also," said Miss Harrison. "Where does this path lead to?" 

"To the road. " 

"How long is it?" 

"A hundred yards or so. 

"What! have you never heard of the boss?" 

"How could I have heard of him when you know that I am a stranger in these 
parts?" 

"Well, I thought his name was known clear across the country. Until this 
morning I have never breathed one word to my wife upon this matter. It is 
possible that I may have to ask your company and assistance upon a small 
expedition which will have be undertaken to-night, if my chain of reasoning 
should prove to be correct. 

"'Here they are!' I exclaimed. 

"The Coroner: What do you mean? 

"Witness: I was so disturbed and excited as I rushed out into the open, that I 
could think of nothing except of my father. "Let us see if there is any answer. 
" 

The detective seated himself in the arm-chair, and puffed complacently at his 
cigar. " 

"That, sir, goes without saying. Let us have him arrested on his arrival. Ma 
foi, but they are very swift! They swoop upon us like two goshawks on a heron. 
For me, I have played the old game of war since ever I had hair on my chin, and 
I have seen ten thousand brave men in one day with their faces to the sky, but 
I swear by Him who made me that I cannot abide the work of the butcher. But 
then a simpler and more natural explanation came to my mind. " 

"Who?" 

"Why, Bannister, the servant. From the shores of the Mississippi to the western 
slopes of the Rocky Mountains they had struggled on with a constancy almost 
unparalleled in history. Brother Luke hath given me some skill in damask work, 
and in the enamelling of shrines, tabernacles, diptychs and triptychs. He said 
that--" 

"It boots not what he said. Her next movement was as unexpected as it was 
spirited. 

"Surely your memory deceives you," said I. It has been a standing jest in the 
family that nothing could ever wake me during the night. It was horrible to see 
the fierce brutes with foaming mouths and glaring eyes, rushing and grasping, 
but forever missing their elusive enemies, while arrow after arrow buried 
itself in their hides. Some of the men were recognized, and there is hope that 
a conviction may be obtained. That is not Tobias Gregson's way of going to 
work. Yes, you will find some very singular points about the moor, Dr. Now we 
are on the bridge. That's the house--all alone at the Iron Dike crossroad, same 
as you see here on the map--without another within earshot. Holmes, which gave 
us one of the few bits of positive evidence that came out at the inquest. We 
may come on something later which will bear upon it. We were all assembled 
round him when the door opened, and a tall, gaunt woman entered the room. She 
has hardly been away from her home for a day during that time. She had hardly 
said the words when young Mr. Her name then was Mrs. 

"He may find his way in, but never out," she cried. The strangers stood in a 
little group under the shadow of the engine house. I inquired of him whether he 
had ever heard of Colonel Lysander Stark. At the same time, Mr. His little 
wife, insensible to all appearance, was slung over his great shoulder, and he 
blundered and thundered up the stair, scrambling and tripping, but carrying 
himself and her through sheer will-force through that mephitic atmosphere to 
the haven of temporary safety. He greeted us with a stately courtesy and seated 
himself at his desk, his red beard streaming down on the table. " 

"You will do nothing of the sort. 

"Yes," said he, "we need them sometimes in the place I come from. "He prices 
the lot at a minimum of two hundred thousand pounds. The other is Don James, 
whom we purpose with the aid of God to help to his throne in Majorca. 

"What's this?" he cried in a high, screaming voice. 

"In that case it is clearly our duty, in the interests of justice, to take his 
statement," said the Inspector. I am inclined to agree with you, Roxton, that 
this one is defective. She had married a man named Oakshott, and lived in 
Brixton Road, where she fattened fowls for the market. Hitherto his orgies had 
always been confined to one day, and he had come back, twitching and shattered, 
in the evening. But now the spell had been upon him eight-and-forty hours, and 
he lay there, doubtless among the dregs of the docks, breathing in the poison 
or sleeping off the effects. We descended into the kitchen and laid the two 
domestics upon their respective beds. 

It is indeed, a fearful place. 

"I had every reason to suppose that this Abe Slaney was an American, since Abe 
is an American contraction, and since a letter from America had been the 
starting-point of all the trouble. Douglas was a reticent man, and there were 
some chapters in his life of which he never spoke. I may tell you that poor 
Douglas had just one fault in the world, and that was his jealousy. The great 
ordeal was in front of us; at last we were about to make our final effort, and 
yet Holmes had said nothing, and I could only surmise what his course of action 
would be. 

"The two lads who slept in the chaff-cutting loft above the harness-room were 
quickly aroused. " 

"I cannot understand, then, how you can say that there is no such danger. He 
waved his hand to the sofa, and our palpitating visitor with his agitated 
companion sat side by side upon it. His two clenched hands were raised above 
his head, and a heavy, blackthorn stick lay across them. His age was six and 
forty, but the constant practice of arms, together with a cleanly life, had 
preserved his activity and endurance unimpaired, so that from a distance he 
seemed to have the slight limbs and swift grace of a boy. His hair, too, as he 
swept off his very curly-brimmed hat, was grizzled round the edges and thin 
upon the top. His tangled beard, grizzled hair, and outstanding, drooping 
eyebrows combined to give an air of dignity and power to his appearance, but 
his face was of an ashen white, while his lips and the corners of his nostrils 
were tinged with a shade of blue. A cigarette glowed amid the tangle of white 
hair, and the air of the room was fetid with stale tobacco smoke. 

"You have a few sheep in the paddock," he said. 

"It is well up to the fourth mark. He was a young but trusted member of the 
detective force, who had distinguished himself in several cases which had been 
intrusted to him. One singular point which struck her quick feminine eye was 
that although he wore some dark coat, such as he had started to town in, he had 
on neither collar nor necktie. I venture to trust that we may have some future 
opportunity for the closer study of the carnivorous dinosaurs. 

"If she wrote the note she was presumably the friend and confederate of Garcia. 
The presence of the gipsies, and the use of the word 'band,' which was used by 
the poor girl, no doubt, to explain the appearance which she had caught a 
hurried glimpse of by the light of her match, were sufficient to put me upon an 
entirely wrong scent. The long sweep of green water roaring forever down, and 
the thick flickering curtain of spray hissing forever upward, turn a man giddy 
with their constant whirl and clamor. A SCANDAL IN BOHEMIA 

I. 

"Welcome, Sir Henry! Welcome to Baskerville Hall!" 

A tall man had stepped from the shadow of the porch to open the door of the 
wagonette. After Wilson took Delhi and Sir Colin relieved Lucknow the back of 
the business was broken. 

"'I will tell you how Morstan died,' he continued. "They have taken to a boat 
here. " 

"We have known for some time that a clever gang was at work," said the 
inspector. "We were the old women to be so taken in. Now we are fresh and well, 
so it is all cheerful once more. His gaunt face was scratched and bloody, his 
clothes were hanging in rags, and his hat was gone. He turned the two best 
rooms of the first floor into a sitting-room and bedroom for himself. Suddenly 
he raised his bearded face, saw us close to him, and pulled up, springing from 
his machine. "It does seem a most preposterous way of settling a dispute. Are 
you hungry, Watson?" 

"Not particularly. It stands alone, for we saw nothing more which could be 
called remarkable. As he turned it slantwise to the light, the glint upon the 
rims of the copper shells within the drum showed that it was fully loaded. Here 
they are in this telegram, and the other end of our tangled skein must lie 
among them. 

"The windows are all dark," remarked the inspector. How otherwise could he have 
seen the monster which he sketched in his notebook?" 

"There you reason somewhat ahead of the proved facts," said the stubborn 
Summerlee. I well remember how he plied me with questions as to the amount and 
the time that was needed for its effect, but I little dreamed that he could 
have a personal reason for asking. Have you turned the case over in your mind?" 

"Yes, I have thought a good deal of it in the course of the day. " 

"You had best take it, then. You must find your own ink, pens, and 
blotting-paper, but we provide this table and chair. That is about the only bit 
of consolation I have had to-day. My end is that the crime was committed half 
an hour earlier than reported; that Mrs. That these monsters should tear each 
other to pieces was a part of the strange struggle for existence, but that they 
should turn upon modern man, that they should deliberately track and hunt down 
the predominant human, was a staggering and fearsome thought. " 

I assented. " 

"You see, my dear Watson,"--he propped his test-tube in the rack, and began to 
lecture with the air of a professor addressing his class--"it is not really 
difficult to construct a series of inferences, each dependent upon its 
predecessor and each simple in itself. Holmes, you will be good enough to 
explain how it is that I have received a letter from him to-day. As to this 
terrible person of yours, where is he?" 

"I rather fancy that he is on the stair," said Holmes, serenely. I crouched low 
among the bushes, for I knew from past experience that with a single cry the 
creature could bring a hundred of its loathsome mates about my ears. " 

"Do you know him?" 

"Oh, yes! he is the green-grocer who brings our vegetables round. Wilson. I 
shall be happy to give you an opinion upon the subject in the course of a day 
or two. " 

A heavy step was heard upon the stairs, and an instant later there entered a 
tall, ruddy, clean-shaven gentleman, whose clear eyes and florid cheeks told of 
a life led far from the fogs of Baker Street. Holmes," said Gregson. 

"I feared as much," said Holmes. McCauley cleared. 

"10th. Still, we can't deny that you hit the nail on the head sometimes. 

"Eight weeks passed away like this, and I had written about Abbots and Archery 
and Armour and Architecture and Attica, and hoped with diligence that I might 
get on to the B's before very long. 

"Mr. Holmes. 

"Miss Harrison," said Holmes, speaking with the utmost intensity of manner, 
"you must stay where you are all day. Then it lengthened out until it became a 
yellow line, and then, without any warning or sound, a gash seemed to open and 
a hand appeared, a white, almost womanly hand, which felt about in the centre 
of the little area of light. 

It was a large and bright dwelling, rather a villa than a cottage, with a 
considerable garden which was already, in that Cornish air, well filled with 
spring flowers. "Nothing has more individuality, save perhaps watches and 
bootlaces. "By the way, I suppose your friend was a healthy young 
fellow--nothing amiss with him?" 

"Sound as a bell. A golden St. In his right hand he carried an old-fashioned 
carpet-bag, which he placed upon the table. It floods the banks, extends in 
great lagoons over a monstrous waste of country, and forms a huge district, 
called locally the Gapo, which is for the most part too marshy for foot-travel 
and too shallow for boating. I put the case into your hands and shall do 
exactly what you advise. There was seldom much over, but I managed to scrape 
along somehow. I bought this estate, which chanced to be in the market, and I 
set myself to do a little good with my money, to make up for the way in which I 
had earned it. I remember the look in your eyes. 

But it was not destined that our investigation should have so adventurous an 
ending. We were sure that our enemies would be behind us like our own shadows. 
We were all assembled round him when the door opened, and a tall, gaunt woman 
entered the room. " 

"Subtle enough and horrible enough. I promise you that," said Sherlock Holmes. 
" 

"Ah, of course. "It is but poor fare that I can lay before you--milk, cheese, 
wine, and bacon--yet your squire and yourself will doubtless excuse it. The 
police have really done nothing locally, save the arrest of these gipsies. The 
Adventure of the Speckled Band IX. "Right under the blade bone!" quoth the 
archer, sauntering forward for his arrow. 

"The old hound is the best when all is said," quoth the bailiff of Southampton, 
as they made back for the roadway. " 

"Yes, a few of us even then could have guessed the date. On the whole, it was 
probably some creature of the weasel and stoat tribe--and yet it is larger than 
any of these that I have seen. 

"Really," he said as he gathered them up, "I begin to think that it would save 
my correspondents' money if I were to adopt a telegraphic address. You too, 
Doctor, you have taken an interest in the case and may as well stick to us. " 

"There is no connection. From the moment that I conceived the idea of the body 
being upon the roof, which surely was not a very abstruse one, all the rest was 
inevitable. If they do not themselves find it out, I see no reason why I should 
prompt them to take a broader point of view. But I read suspicion in his eyes. 
Henderson, of High Gable, was by all accounts a curious man to whom curious 
adventures might befall. I concentrated my attention, therefore, upon him and 
his household. " 

"In this case, however--" 

"I never make exceptions. "That was an expression he has used when I questioned 
him. Even in the darkness as we lay upon the strand, we heard from time to time 
the snort and plunge of the huge creatures who lived therein. " 

"Surely it is final as regards the man's death. There is one predominant 'He' 
for all of them. I shall always remember as we looked back how far behind we 
could see the heads and necks of our horrible pursuers rising and falling amid 
the reeds. You felt so strongly about it that I knew you could not think of 
Beecher without thinking of that also. Mrs. Browner's house had been closed for 
more than three days, and the neighbours were of opinion that she had gone 
south to see her relatives. It had been ascertained at the shipping offices 
that Browner had left aboard of the May Day, and I calculate that she is due in 
the Thames tomorrow night. He was clad in a dark suit, and I saw that he had a 
black beard. He then thrilled the assembly by some account of the terrible 
carnivorous dinosaurs, which had on more than one occasion pursued members of 
the party, and which were the most formidable of all the creatures which they 
had encountered. He is now translating my small works into French. "An 
easy-going, free-handed gentleman," said Ames, the butler. Well, Challenger, 
now is your time if you wish to study the subjective phenomena of physical 
dissolution. " 

A small side door led into the whitewashed corridor from which the three 
bedrooms opened. He held them on his nose, endeavoured to read through them, 
went to the window and stared up the street with them, looked at them most 
minutely in the full light of the lamp, and finally, with a chuckle, seated 
himself at the table and wrote a few lines upon a sheet of paper, which he 
tossed across to Stanley Hopkins. He seemed himself to be agitated. 

"You look ill, Mr. If there was nothing else left to him, he could at least 
devote his life to revenge. No one there, I suppose?" 

As Holmes drew the curtain I was aware, from some little rigidity and alertness 
of his attitude, that he was prepared for an emergency. It was horrible--but it 
was doocedly interestin' too. 

"You can see where they rested the body. 

"On the contrary, Watson, you can see everything. There was Dr. ' Have you no 
desire, in view of later research, to modify this statement?  Do you not think 
that it is over-accentuated?  With your permission, I would ask the favor of an 
interview, as I feel strongly upon the subject, and have certain suggestions 
which I could only elaborate in a personal conversation. But suddenly a little 
chill of doubt came upon me. But, comrade, it is in my mind that there is some 
small matter of dispute still open between us. " 

Holmes and I had listened with the utmost interest to this extraordinary 
statement, which had been delivered in the jerky, broken fashion of a man who 
is under the influence of extreme emotions. We are held here with no clear 
means of making our escape, and bitterly we chafe against it. " 

"What is your plan, then?" asked Holmes, as he walked down the dark tree-lined 
road. He was a small, stout man with a red face and a peppery manner. In a 
minute he was back again, his face quivering with eagerness. Their heads were 
thrown back, their lips compressed, their blood-stained swords poised over 
their right shoulders, and their left feet thrown out. A council was now held 
by the whole tribe squatting in a circle, whilst we sat near on a slab of 
basalt and watched their proceedings. It was clear enough to see for some 
distance, but Thaddeus Sholto took down one of the side-lamps from the carriage 
to give us a better light upon our way. Douglas chanced to come upon him, so he 
murdered him and escaped. He shot him and escaped, as arranged. But he was 
always kind to the boy in his own way. A devil with merely local powers like a 
parish vestry would be too inconceivable a thing. Another from the Norman 
whizzed into the waist, broke the back of a horse, and crashed its way through 
the side of the vessel. 

"You will remember, Watson," he remarked one afternoon, "that there is a single 
common point of resemblance in the varying reports which have reached us. Out 
of the black shadows there glimmered little red circles of light, now bright, 
now faint, as the burning poison waxed or waned in the bowls of the metal 
pipes. 

"And now as to the villains who seemed to be immediately implicated in the 
matter. Josiah Brown, I suppose?" said Holmes. Sandeford, of Lower Grove Road, 
Reading. It is simply to say that you transfer every possible right that you 
ever had in the bust to me. It was broken into fragments. " Just under the head 
was a broad silver band nearly an inch across. 

"Sir Nigel Loring of Hampshire, sire. Obviously they have been caused by 
someone who has very carelessly scraped round the edges of the sole in order to 
remove crusted mud from it. 

"I was already convinced, or almost convinced, that John Straker went down to 
the stables in the dead of the night and took out Silver Blaze. Broken fences, 
crumbling walls, vineyards littered with stones, the shattered arches of 
bridges--look where you might, the signs of ruin and rapine met the eye. Here 
and there only, on the farthest sky-line, the gnarled turrets of a castle, or 
the graceful pinnacles of church or of monastery showed where the forces of the 
sword or of the spirit had preserved some small islet of security in this 
universal flood of misery. A short walk brought us to a secluded road fringed 
with pleasant houses, each standing in its own grounds. When he glanced up 
again, Alleyne had, with a few bold strokes of the brush, tinted in a woman's 
face and neck upon the white sheet in front of him. It was like a boiling 
kettle or the bubbling of some great pot. Were there no other reasons, it is 
enough that my father and your brother would both cry out against it. 
Therefore, my sweeting, there is the more need that I should turn to where 
there is good pay to be earned and brave ransoms to be won. " 

"The boy's, then?" 

"Possibly, if we could prove a bicycle to have been in his possession. " 

"Oh, dear! That is very bad! Your Majesty has indeed committed an indiscretion. 

"You know that there is another man then?" 

"Yes, sir; there is another man upon the moor. On that to the right sat a very 
tall and well formed man with red hair, a livid face, and a cold blue eye, 
which had in it something peculiarly sinister and menacing. "With reference to 
the Upper Norwood tragedy," it remarked, "we have reason to believe that the 
matter promises to be even more complex and mysterious than was originally 
supposed. I will turn the facts over in my mind, Mr. Douglas under this roof. " 

"And how long have you been playing this trick upon us, Mr. She was a blonde 
young lady, small, dainty, well gloved, and dressed in the most perfect taste. 
She is my right hand. At first I thought that she had not recognised me, but as 
I bent over her she suddenly shrieked out in a voice which I shall never 
forget, 'Oh, my God! Helen! It was the band! The speckled band!' There was 
something else which she would fain have said, and she stabbed with her finger 
into the air in the direction of the doctor's room, but a fresh convulsion 
seized her and choked her words. She rallied however, on drinking a glass of 
water which I quietly poured out for her from a Venetian carafe upon the 
side-table. Her sufferings were physical as well as mental, for over one eye 
rose a hideous, plum-coloured swelling, which her maid, a tall, austere woman, 
was bathing assiduously with vinegar and water. Her plump little white legs 
terminating in white socks and neat shoes with shining buckles, offered a 
strange contrast to the long shrivelled members of her companion. 

"I won't waste your time," said he, raising himself upon the sofa. " 

"Was it only recently that he made such remarks?" 

"Yes, quite recently. Touching that same slaying of the Redeemer, it was a bad 
business. A good padre in France read to us from a scroll the whole truth of 
the matter. All the woes of tortured life, all its stupendous indictment of 
high heaven, its innumerable sorrows, seemed to be centered and condensed into 
that one dreadful, agonized cry. They were a humble group of wayfarers, such as 
might have been found that night in any inn through the length and breadth of 
England; but to him they represented that vague world against which he had been 
so frequently and so earnestly warned. On I go, and onwards over seas where man 
hath never yet sailed, and I see a great land under new stars and a stranger 
sky, and still the land is England. K. K. K. K. K. '; and then 'Put the papers 
on the sundial. '" 

"What have you done?" asked Holmes. "I have to be careful," he continued, 
turning to me with a smile, "for I dabble with poisons a good deal. " 

"And so say I," quoth the other Englishman; "but, certes, there is no fear of 
our forgetting it while they have a tongue in their heads. The letter which I 
hold in my hand is from Lord St. 

Through the gateway we passed into the avenue, where the wheels were again 
hushed amid the leaves, and the old trees shot their branches in a sombre 
tunnel over our heads. That is quite settled," said he, rising and putting his 
lens in his pocket. 

"I stayed long enough to make certain that the house was absolutely empty. " 

"But I do. In her right hand was found the charred stump of a match, and in her 
left a match-box. 

"Whatever have you been doing with yourself, Watson?" he asked in undisguised 
wonder, as we rattled through the crowded London streets. But suppose you had a 
friend up here who lowered you this good stout rope which I see in the corner, 
securing one end of it to this great hook in the wall. " 

"And none whom you love?" 

"Nay, I will not say that," said Alleyne. There was the dead dog, however, to 
prove that his conjecture had been correct. " 

"Well?" 

"He said, 'I'll pay you five pounds a week if I can have it on my own terms. 

"Come, Lady Hilda. The butler brought me my coffee into the library, and I took 
the chance to ask him a few questions. As I roused myself from a short nap 
after day had dawned, my eyes fell upon a most singular appearance upon my own 
leg. He was himself red-headed, and he had a great sympathy for all red-headed 
men; so when he died it was found that he had left his enormous fortune in the 
hands of trustees, with instructions to apply the interest to the providing of 
easy berths to men whose hair is of that colour. I have heard him talk of the 
coal and iron districts. " 

She swept across the room and seated herself with her back to the window. " 

"Then comes our expedition of to-day. Douglas gave a cry of astonishment at 
Holmes's words. You have known your husband only in England, have you not?" 

"Yes, we have been married five years. A horse so treated would develop a 
slight lameness, which would be put down to a strain in exercise or a touch of 
rheumatism, but never to foul play. He in turn had had it from someone else. I 
think that you had best leave his examination to me. The great ordeal was in 
front of us; at last we were about to make our final effort, and yet Holmes had 
said nothing, and I could only surmise what his course of action would be. Such 
a yell of welcome broke forth when his black beard first protruded round the 
corner that I began to suspect Tarp Henry was right in his surmise, and that 
this assemblage was there not merely for the sake of the lecture, but because 
it had got rumored abroad that the famous Professor would take part in the 
proceedings. Good, quiet, uncomplaining mother Nature, long slighted and 
miscalled, still bides her time and draws to her bosom the most errant of her 
children. 

The two walked swiftly across the meadow to the narrow bridge, he in front and 
she a pace or two behind. "This is Indian work, I suppose?" 

"Yes; it is Benares metal-work. " 

"But the twelve-mile drive?" gasped Hatherley. Holmes. I think not. Even the 
news brought back by Hopkins that he had found the children, and that they had 
undoubtedly seen a woman exactly corresponding with Holmes's description, and 
wearing either spectacles or eyeglasses, failed to rouse any sign of keen 
interest. It was the very voice of Maple White Land bidding us good-bye. If you 
and your friend will sit down, I will tell you all I can. " 

Holmes had recovered his equanimity, though I still seemed to detect gleams of 
amusement in his expression. "This is my friend, Dr. The lady could talk 
English fairly well. Waldron sat down, and, after a chirrup from the chairman, 
Professor Challenger rose and advanced to the edge of the platform. There are 
points in it with which I disagree, and it has been my duty to indicate them as 
they arose, but, none the less, Mr. No one could swear to his face, poor devil! 
I brought down this suit of clothes, and in a quarter of an hour Barker and I 
had put my dressing gown on him and he lay as you found him. Gravely and 
sedately they stood beneath the morning sun waiting for the onslaught of their 
foemen. 

He had scarce done so before Sir Nigel rode out from the holders' enclosure, 
and galloping at full speed down the lists, drew his charger up before the 
prince's stand with a jerk which threw it back upon its haunches. "Well, he can 
come if he wants," he said in a surly voice. He made a sweeping bow to the 
three of us and walked quietly off in the custody of the detective. 

"This aroused my curiosity, so when I went out for a walk in the grounds with 
my charge, I strolled round to the side from which I could see the windows of 
this part of the house. To get at this, I endeavored first of all to solve the 
reason of the original burglary at Mr. 

My first impulse was to tell Sir Henry all my plans. "There is the 
gravel-drive, and there are the rose-bushes where I lay. It may be that my 
little comrade has been over quick in reproof, he having gone early into the 
cloisters and seen little of the rough ways and words of the world. As to the 
Indians I cannot doubt that they are more recent immigrants from below. Through 
the haze I had a vague vision of Holmes in his dressing-gown coiled up in an 
armchair with his black clay pipe between his lips. The door was swinging open 
and his hand was grasping the handle, as if he had attempted to leap forth at 
the last instant. 



An enormous depression was weighing upon my spirits. Lord John was standing at 
gaze with his finger on the trigger of his elephant-gun, his eager hunter's 
soul shining from his fierce eyes. There is a chill in the  air after dark, and 
we had all drawn close to the blaze. She returned to her father's house more 
light-hearted than she had ever been since Jack McMurdo had come into her life. 
He got engaged to her when traveling last winter, and she came down to be 
introduced to his people, with her brother as escort. He demands the wedding 
ring--Heaven only knows why, but so it must have been. 

"That's the best I can do for you," said he. "May I offer you a glass of 
Chianti, Miss Morstan?  Or of Tokay?  I keep no other wines. McFarlane, how it 
is that you are still at liberty, since there appears to be enough evidence to 
justify your arrest?" 

"I live at Torrington Lodge, Blackheath, with my parents, Mr. Holmes, but last 
night, having to do business very late with Mr. " 

"It seems to me that you have been very shamefully treated," said Holmes. "I 
can't make the man out. 

"It is a curious thing," remarked Holmes, "that a typewriter has really quite 
as much individuality as a man's handwriting. "Your morning letters, if I 
remember right, were from a fish-monger and a tide-waiter. Pray step into my 
little sanctum. I have given you all the facts. 

"But now came the real difficulty of the inquiry. "I am not a Lombard, sire. 
This room is not well adapted for a cell, and Mr. Douglas was a remarkable man, 
both in character and in person. I saw no necessity to disturb them; but I was 
pleased to hear that the lady was not visibly pining and that she had partaken 
of an excellent dinner. As the creature felt me grow limp in his grasp, two 
white canines gleamed for a moment at each side of the vile mouth, and the grip 
tightened still more upon my chin, forcing it always upwards and back. At Para 
they knew nothing. I struggled against it, but in vain. I know I ought to have 
spoken to Lord St. I clap a silk gown on my girl's back. You didn't get away 
from us so easily, You see. The purport is perfectly clear. Drink and politics 
had made the Boss a very rich as well as powerful man. The more terrible, 
therefore, seemed that glimpse of the prison or the gallows which had risen 
before him the night before. --Bring oxygen. --Challenger. 

"Bring oxygen!"  The Professor, as I remembered him, had an elephantine sense 
of humour capable of the most clumsy and unwieldly gambollings. I understand 
that it was your daughter who required my presence here, and I am acting in her 
interests. For my part, I believe that there are so many worthy knights and 
gallant gentlemen in heaven who know how such things should be arranged, that 
there is little fear that we shall find ourselves mixed up with base roturiers 
and swine-herds. " 

"Then where the dooce did they drop from?" asked Lord John. The lady had taken 
a quick step forward and had held out her hand to him, but he still refused to 
raise his eyes. " 

"Why should you think so?" 

"Well, apart from this cigarette-end, was it not suggestive that the only time 
the lodger went out was immediately after his taking the rooms?  He came 
back--or someone came back--when all witnesses were out of the way. " 

"I ask no better," said the prince. It ended at the paving of asphalt which led 
up to the gates of the Mapleton stables. " 

"Didn't I tell you so when we started?" cried Sherlock Holmes with a laugh. "I 
should not have the impertinence to do it again after what you say. "You prate 
of holy things, to which your hog's mind can never rise. I will be entirely at 
your service in three minutes, if I might trespass upon your patience so far. 
Once--well, I can hardly tell about the once to an official detective. It was 
on the last occasion that I took the liberty of running over his papers--with 
the most unexpected results. He said nothing, but he smiled at me with the air 
of a man who sees the fulfillment of that which he had expected. The others 
marked it and applauded. Holmes stooped to the water-jug, moistened his sponge, 
and then rubbed it twice vigorously across and down the prisoner's face. 
Perhaps, if you loved a woman, you would have done as much yourself. Then I had 
a sudden happy thought. " 

"The man was mad. There's no town without a lodge, and where there is a lodge 
I'll find my friends. I have said nothing to the local police yet, for I 
thought I had best have your opinion first. 

"My God!" he cried. All is well with us here, save that Pepin hath the mange on 
his back, and Pommers hath scarce yet got clear of his stiffness from being 
four days on ship-board, and the more so because the sea was very high, and we 
were like to founder on account of a hole in her side, which was made by a 
stone cast at us by certain sea-rovers, who may the saints have in their 
keeping, for they have gone from amongst us, as has young Terlake, and 
two-score mariners and archers, who would be the more welcome here as there is 
like to be a very fine war, with much honor and all hopes of advancement, for 
which I go to gather my Company together, who are now at Montaubon, where they 
pillage and destroy; yet I hope that, by God's help, I may be able to show that 
I am their master, even as, my sweet lady, I am thy servant. 

"The surgeon, Dr. " 

The book showed that two names had been added after that of Baskerville. There 
it is, where the lady is walking. As you are aware, such devices are common in 
old libraries. It was a prostrate man face downward upon the ground, the head 
doubled under him at a horrible angle, the shoulders rounded and the body 
hunched together as if in the act of throwing a somersault. The get-up was 
inimitable. 

"We must move, and move quick!" said Lord John. 

"I saw you together last night. "I should be glad if you would make me out a 
check for six thousand pounds. " There was a gleam in his eyes and a suppressed 
excitement in his manner which convinced me, used as I was to his ways, that 
his hand was upon a clue, though I could not imagine where he had found it. For 
years I had gradually weaned him from that drug mania which had threatened once 
to check his remarkable career. Then he leaned forward, and in the intense 
silence we were aware of the soft lapping of agitated water. 

"I think, Watson," he remarked at last, "that of all our cases we have had none 
more fantastic than this. " 

The young heir glanced round with a gloomy face. I have a vague remembrance of 
his gaunt limbs, his earnest face, and the rise and fall of his bow. Now I have 
come round to you, and on my way I was attacked by a rough with a bludgeon. 

At last the lecture came to an end--I am inclined to think that it was a 
premature one, as the peroration was hurried and disconnected. Save for 
Challenger's luggage we had never a difficulty. " 

"What, then, would you counsel?" 

"That we make for the keep. " 

"The matter does not rest with Colonel Ross. Bows, steel caps, and jacks were 
caught up from the grass. A long cordon cleared the camp of all strangers, 
while the main body fell into four lines with under-officers and file-leaders 
in front and on either flank. He had left the hotel after breakfast yesterday 
morning on his bicycle, and no more was heard of him until our inquiries. "This 
is a most extraordinary case," he said at last--"a most incomprehensible 
affair. I can press it back, and here is the roof itself, sloping at a gentle 
angle. You saw the things I had with me at yonder hostel: name which you will, 
save only the box of rose-colored sugar which I take to the Lady Loring, and 
you shall have it if you will but come with me to France. G. '  That is 
definite enough. 

"'There used to be a very old one over yonder but it was struck by lightning 
ten years ago, and we cut down the stump. 

"You are here for a rest, my dear fellow. "Perhaps you will spare an hour that 
I may have the pleasure of introducing you to my sister. 

"By George!" cried the inspector. I should not stay here. " 

"Then we have stopped all the holes. It seems that a young lady has arrived in 
a considerable state of excitement, who insists upon seeing me. 

"What is your evidence for this, Brother McMurdo?" he asked. It is our task to 
put on record what we have seen, and to leave the further exploration to 
others. " 

"A man's surely," I cried. "Our friend here is a wonderful man for starting a 
chase. What say you, Edricson?" 

"I cannot tell, my fair lord. But I was already so far up the great tree that 
it seemed a humiliation to return without having carried out my mission. Surely 
we are agreed that the more sober and restrained pleasures of the present are 
deeper as well as wiser than the noisy, foolish hustle which passed so often 
for enjoyment in the days of old--days so recent and yet already so 
inconceivable. "  What is left but anti-climax in the life of a journalist 
after that! 

But let me not end on sensational headlines and a merely personal triumph. " 

"No doubt," said I. Our only clue lay in the truncated telegram, and with a 
copy of this in his hand Holmes set forth to find a second link for his chain. 
Yet it was surely impossible that we should halt on the edge of this world of 
mystery when our very souls were tingling with impatience to push forward and 
to pluck the heart from it. " 

"There can be no manner of doubt about it," said Sir Oliver Buttesthorn. 
Barrymore in the long corridor with the sun full upon her face. 

"Did the boy deliver it into your own hands?" asked Sir Henry. "So you read 
this letter this morning?" 

"Yes, sir. " 

"And came at once to interview me?" 

"Yes, sir. Sir Henry and I both stared at the woman in amazement. Down swooped 
the great cog into the narrow channel which was the portal to safety. And Ford, 
they are of a south Saxon stock, and of good repute. I have a box for 'Les 
Huguenots. Foremost of all, of course, were the sight of the fiery caves and 
the certainty that some troglodytic race inhabited them. But besides that I 
could speak from experience of the central lake. As danger thickened his jaunty 
manner would increase, his speech become more racy, his cold eyes glitter into 
ardent life, and his Don Quixote moustache bristle with joyous excitement. As I 
ran down the passage, my sister's door was unlocked, and revolved slowly upon 
its hinges. A fierce quarrel broke out, which was increased by the two 
guardsmen, who took sides with one of the loungers, and by the 
scissors-grinder, who was equally hot upon the other side. To-morrow some 
further evidence may help us to an identification. 











"A Sight which I shall Never Forget" 

Just as the sun was setting upon that melancholy night I saw the lonely figure 
of the Indian upon the vast plain beneath me, and I watched him, our one faint 
hope of salvation, until he disappeared in the rising mists of evening which 
lay, rose-tinted from the setting sun, between the far-off river and me. 

"Nor is there an end of mine," remarked Challenger, "for science is not dead, 
and this catastrophe in itself will offer us many most absorbing problems for 
investigation. McMurdo," said the older man, speaking with a hesitation which 
showed that he was on delicate ground. "It was kind of you to come. That the 
man was highly intellectual is of course obvious upon the face of it, and also 
that he was fairly well-to-do within the last three years, although he has now 
fallen upon evil days. 

Sherlock Holmes's eyes glistened, his pale cheeks took a warmer hue, and his 
whole eager face shone with an inward light when the call for work reached him. 
Among the older men were many whose features showed the tigerish, lawless souls 
within; but looking at the rank and file it was difficult to believe that these 
eager and open-faced young fellows were in very truth a dangerous gang of 
murderers, whose minds had suffered such complete moral perversion that they 
took a horrible pride in their proficiency at the business, and looked with 
deepest respect at the man who had the reputation of making what they called "a 
clean job. " He laughed sonorously at his own conceit, for, though he had 
little sense of humor, the crudest pleasantry from his own lips moved him 
always to roars of appreciation. " 

"What then?" 

"I will get her to show me. " 

"And as to the prize, sire," quoth Sir Nigel, "I am sure that I speak for all 
when I say this French knight hath our leave to bear it away with him if he can 
fairly win it. Holmes. Supposing that a matter were brought confidentially to 
his knowledge, is it absolutely necessary that he should pass it on to the 
detectives?" 

"Yes, that's it," said Barker eagerly. What could it be? Might not the nature 
of the injuries reveal something to my medical instincts? I rang the bell and 
called for the weekly county paper, which contained a verbatim account of the 
inquest. The various checks which influence the struggle for existence in the 
world at large are all neutralized or altered. His death had certainly been 
instantaneous and painless. He was ready enough to join the conspiracy, as the 
only means of saving ourselves, and before we had crossed the Bay there were 
only two of the prisoners who were not in the secret. 'Show a leg, matey,' says 
he:  'time to turn out guard. '  My old man woke up Jim,--that's my 
eldest,--and away they went, without so much as a word to me. The patient and I 
then plunged into a discussion of his case, of which I took exhaustive notes. 

All these details I observed afterwards. The steersman smiled, and pointed with 
his foot to where a short heavy cross-bow quarrel stuck quivering in the 
boards. I had a map beside me though, and when once I had spotted the principal 
hotels and stations, I got on pretty well. First at him who flaunts with my 
lady's silken frock. There is the pension to Jim Carnaway's widow. Round the 
corner of the narrow street there came rushing a brace of whining dogs with 
tails tucked under their legs, and after them a white-faced burgher, with 
outstretched hands and wide-spread fingers, his hair all abristle and his eyes 
glinting back from one shoulder to the other, as though some great terror were 
at his very heels. He was young, not more than five-and-twenty, I should say, 
with a strong, masculine face; but he was exceedingly pale and gave me the 
impression of a man who was suffering from some strong agitation, which it took 
all his strength of mind to control. 

"'The governor is dying,' were the first words he said. Its reflection was shot 
back in ruddy patches by the distant pools which lay amid the great Grimpen 
Mire. Its owner grabbed at its legs, but too late to hold it. It is only 
goodness which gives extras, and so I say again that we have much to hope from 
the flowers. I will do nothing serious without my trusted comrade and 
biographer at my elbow. I sprang out of bed and flung open the shutters. Even 
as I did so my conscience pricked me, for I felt that perhaps if I had held my 
hand all of them might have passed in their sleep. 

Toby proved to be an ugly, long-haired, lop-eared creature, half spaniel and 
half lurcher, brown-and-white in color, with a very clumsy waddling gait. "Not 
been long in practice, but has had a good deal to do. It's a pity there are no 
shutters to your windows. But now there is Steiner--" 

Von Bork started violently, and his ruddy face turned a shade paler. Anyhow, he 
never got tallow-stains from a gas-jet. Besides, with this crowd about, it was 
well that she should have someone near to look after her. She is 
four-and-twenty. If she had been willing to help justice she would probably 
have communicated with the police already. If it is to-morrow we shall be more 
ready still. That is what she would have done if she had wished to shield the 
criminal. Well, after the murder I calculated that Beppo would probably hurry 
rather than delay his movements. Poor devils they were, down-faced little 
chaps, and had enough to make them so. Smith, he was a smoker also, but not as 
bad as the professor. His health--well, I don't know that it's better nor worse 
for the smoking. 

"Having conceived the idea he proceeded to carry it out with considerable 
finesse. "But why is it, my good fellow, that you sit upon this man. " 

Alleyne smiled, but shook his head. "Let us have the despatch-box brought in. 
That mission was to test the truth of Professor Challenger's statements. 
There's no vice in him. My own inclination is to put half a dozen of my farm 
lads in the shrubbery, and when this fellow comes again to give him such a 
hiding that he will leave us in peace for the future. I am much indebted to 
you, sir, for a Scotch bonnet is fitted neither to my years nor my gravity. 
From their sounds Lord John judged them to be some form of wild cattle. At 
first he would content himself by using his machinery in order to find their 
victim. 

Several times I had observed that Milverton looked at his watch, and once he 
had risen and sat down again, with a gesture of impatience. " 

"Ha! I had forgotten that there was ill blood betwixt you. 

"What would you do, then?" 

"I would engage a launch and go down the river on the track of the Aurora. It 
was Summerlee who opened the debate. It may have been a box. If it please you, 
she went to the circus last night along with----" 

"Is that her ring?" I asked. I pulled out my knife, and--well, there! I've said 
enough. I even took a pencil and jotted them down. Behold the result!" 

He put one hand in the front of his ragged jacket and pointed proudly with the 
other. 

By this time the gas-bag had swollen to a goodly rotundity and was jerking 
strongly upon its lashings. 

"'Ah, that is the point. I see him every day through my telescope upon the 
roof. 

"'You dog!' I said; 'I have hunted you from Salt Lake City to St. No one has 
seen him. " 

"I agree with you," said the younger statesman. " 

"It was barred in the morning. 

"Anything else?" 

"He said that we were slack about such matters--that it would be easy for a 
traitor to get the plans. 

THE END 







































The Sign of the Four 













Contents 











The Science of Deduction 

Sherlock Holmes took his bottle from the corner of the mantel-piece and his 
hypodermic syringe from its neat morocco case. "I wish you were all at the 
devil together. Barclay, and your mutual recognition. " 

The man gave a violent start. I have seen it in the train of the Percies. When 
I was a very young man, Mr. Where the path ran down a great stone had been 
fixed in the centre of the brook, but it was too far from the bank for her aged 
and uncertain feet. It is, as I have said, a labyrinth of an old house, 
especially the original wing, which is now practically uninhabited; but we 
ransacked every room and cellar without discovering the least sign of the 
missing man. " 

"But it has twice been burgled. 

"The French are also very worthy men. " 

"But this man--your friend--has he any other person that he would be likely to 
write to?" 

"Well, I dare say he knows one or two more. I only mention it because, if I had 
been handling the case, I should have been inclined to make that the 
starting-point of my investigation. But what have we here by the wayside?" 

"It appears to be a very holy man," said Alleyne. 

"You have no reason for fear, Mr. Watson, that sensational cases had 
disappeared out of our papers. 

"I thought so. 

"'I can give you it at once. ' 

"What do you think of that, Watson?" cried Holmes in high glee, rubbing his 
hands together with satisfaction. 

"'No excuse will avail,' said Mr. 'Now that you call it to my mind,' he 
answered, 'Brunton did ask me about the height of the tree some months ago, in 
connection with some little argument with the groom. ' 

"This was excellent news, Watson, for it showed me that I was on the right 
road. When I was alone once more, however, with the precious case lying upon 
the table in front of me, I could not but think with some misgivings of the 
immense responsibility which it entailed upon me. Gazing over the edge, they 
looked down upon the horrible destruction which had been caused by the 
explosion. For forty yards round the portal the ground was black with writhing, 
screaming figures, who struggled up and hurled themselves down again, tossing 
this way and that, sightless, scorched, with fire bursting from their tattered 
clothing. Then he leaned forward, and in the intense silence we were aware of 
the soft lapping of agitated water. 

"No it isn't that," she said at last. "French land, French blood, French 
speech," she answered. "They are French, and France shall have them. " 

"Our young friend here knows where they live. " 

"You deduced it, then?" 

"Certainly. 

I looked with amazement at the absurd hieroglyphics upon the paper. 

Full in our flushed faces, before the last tinkle of falling fragments had died 
away, there came the wholesome breath of the wind, blowing strong and sweet. 
The great concourse of noblemen and famous soldiers, the national character of 
the contest, and the fact that this was a last trial of arms before what 
promised to be an arduous and bloody war, all united to make the event one of 
the most notable and brilliant that Bordeaux had ever seen. It was evident that 
the obstacle was far beyond any efforts which we could make to remove it. " 







SUBMERGED 



The chamber which was destined to be the scene of our unforgettable experience 
was a charmingly feminine sitting-room, some fourteen or sixteen feet square. " 

"I quoted the postscript. But how in the name of wonder did you come here, and 
what have you been doing? I thought that you were in Baker Street working out 
that case of blackmailing. He was clearly so scared by his mischance in 
breaking the window and by the approach of Peterson that he thought of nothing 
but flight, but since then he must have bitterly regretted the impulse which 
caused him to drop his bird. The same great powers which I have turned to the 
detection of crime he has used for this particular business. I pushed him off, 
but we were glad when we had got clear of them and safe out of the park. " 

I lay back against the cushions, puffing at my cigar, while Holmes, leaning 
forward, with his long, thin forefinger checking off the points upon the palm 
of his left hand, gave me a sketch of the events which had led to our journey. 
I could see that the problem was entirely to his heart. " 

He rang the bell. My wants were few and simple, so that in less than the time 
stated I was in a cab with my valise, rattling away to Paddington Station. 
These rooms appeared to be much more modern than the central part of the house, 
and the bright paper and numerous candles did something to remove the sombre 
impression which our arrival had left upon my mind. It is a hat of the very 
best quality. My brother and I rushed towards the window, but the man was gone. 
When father died, we were left very poor, but one day we were told that there 
was an advertisement in the TIMES, inquiring for our whereabouts. 

"'Do you mean that it disappeared before you went for help?' 

"'Yes, it was gone. "Good-morning, Colonel," said he; "I hope I don't intrude, 
but we hear that Mr. Holmes of Baker Street is here. As the gleam of the 
street-lamps flashed upon his austere features, I saw that his brows were drawn 
down in thought and his thin lips compressed. 

"'Look in here!' said Mr. 'You must either be with us now or you must be 
silenced forever. ' 

"Two nights later he and his friend Captain Morstan came to my hut in the dead 
of the night with a lantern. '  But he said it in a halting fashion, and I knew 
in my heart that I had got him. 

"Of course after that there was nothing more to be done. " 

Lestrade shot an angry glance at my companion. I could see him throw out his 
chest and stroke his beard as he looked at it. What amuses me is to think of 
Lestrade, who had started off upon the wrong scent. In a few minutes I shall 
probably hear it from your own lips. This is particularly so in the region 
between Holdernesse Hall and the school. Wherever we went we were confronted by 
those grinning faces, which seemed to mock at our dreadful position, smiling 
silently and grimly at the ill-fated survivors of their race. Within a week he 
had become infinitely the most important person at Shafter's. Inscribed upon 
it, in the jagged handwriting of Professor Challenger, were the words:-- 



"Instructions to Lord John Roxton and party. To be opened at Manaos upon July 
15th, at 12 o'clock precisely. Can you imagine what it means for a sensitive 
and high-spirited woman to be tied to him for day and night? It is a sacrilege, 
a crime, a villainy to hold that such a marriage is binding. Wilson?" 

"Yes, I have got it now," he answered with his thick red finger planted halfway 
down the column. "Here it is. In good sooth, I know not what I shall say to 
Master Witherton when I see the Itchen once more. He seizes her, and she, 
snatching up the nearest object, which happens to be this knife, strikes at him 
in order to make him let go his hold. The clerk was struck at the time by his 
excited and nervous manner. The horse may be at the bottom of one of the pits 
or old mines upon the moor. So much also we know. There are deplorable accounts 
from Africa, and the Australian aborigines appear to have been already 
exterminated. Their papers they mean to have, be the holder of them who it may. 
It took us a long day, traveling from seven in the morning till eight at night, 
with only two breaks of one hour each, to get through this obstacle. At eleven 
we shall drive as far as Church Row. It meant everything to me--peace of mind, 
happiness, self-respect--everything. So long as I am alive and they are alive, 
there is no safety in this world for me. There's no motive, Mr. If you 
don't--it's a fine, law-abiding country is England, and there's always a 
policeman within hail. She is living at present at The Myrtles, Beckenham. " 

"A confidential servant?" 

"A little too much so. They are very hospitable people, and I am sure that they 
would be very glad to see you. So desirable in every way were the apartments, 
and so moderate did the terms seem when divided between us, that the bargain 
was concluded upon the spot, and we at once entered into possession. 

"I thought it was father," said she with a pleasing little touch of a German 
accent. Never look rearwards, but always to our glorious goal. It is a long, 
dismal walk, the yew alley, between two high walls of clipped hedge, with a 
narrow band of grass upon either side. But he had not that supreme gift of the 
artist, the knowledge of when to stop. You vill soon be as bad as the rest. 
Also that if page 534 finds us only in the second chapter, the length of the 
first one must have been really intolerable. Likewise a small house, with 
stalls for the cows, and thirty-six gallons of beer for the thirsty weather. " 

"Tut, tut!" cried Sir Nigel, laughing. It was at the window. In response to a 
telephone inquiry, we received nothing more definite than a fulmination against 
the Press, ending up with the remark that if we would notify our boat he would 
hand us any directions which he might think it proper to give us at the moment 
of starting. 

"You have sent for me, holy father?" 

"Yes, brother Jerome, I wish that this matter be disposed of with as little 
scandal as may be, and yet it is needful that the example should be a public 
one. 

"I am much indebted to you for your gracious permission," said the angry 
Professor; for never was a man so intolerant of every form of authority. "I 
made my report at the office," he said. " 

"By my faith! that's easily seen," said the prince, laughing, "for a few score 
English archers at yonder end are bellowing as though they would out-shout the 
mighty multitude. "What then?" said he. " 

"No carriages or horses?" 

"Well, at least he is fairly well-to-do. " 

"It's awful, Mr. 







Sherlock Holmes Gives a Demonstration 

"Now, Watson," said Holmes, rubbing his hands, "we have half an hour to 
ourselves. He's got the dibbs, he has, and where do you think he is at this 
moment? Why, he's the chaplain of this ship--the chaplain, no less! He came 
aboard with a black coat, and his papers right, and money enough in his box to 
buy the thing right up from keel to main-truck. It's six now, so if you care 
for a stroll this beautiful evening I shall be very happy to introduce you to 
two curiosities. That gives you an idea of Moriarty's gains and of the scale on 
which he works. 

"It was the next morning that I realized that I had only exchanged one trouble 
for another. I have written to Lestrade asking him to supply us with the 
details which are now wanting, and which he will only get after he had secured 
his man. The window of the room in which they sat was closed, but the blind was 
not drawn down. He had not been robbed, and there was no particular reason to 
suspect violence. 

"Well, Mr. It is not a very manly thing, Mr. 

The atmosphere of the room was of a horrible and depressing stuffiness. 
Spade-beard and his men had given slowly back, hard pressed by Sir Nigel, 
Aylward, Black Simon, and the poop-guard. Foot by foot the Italian had 
retreated, his armor running blood at every joint, his shield split, his crest 
shorn, his voice fallen away to a mere gasping and croaking. Yet he faced his 
foemen with dauntless courage, dashing in, springing back, sure-footed, 
steady-handed, with a point which seemed to menace three at once. " 

"It is a long road yet to Brockenhurst," said Alleyne; "but here is such bread 
and cheese as I have left, and here, too, is a penny which may help you to 
supper. 

"Exactly. You must play your cards as best you can when such a stake is on the 
table. Mortimer was reading his legend. "My wife is expecting me. We knew him 
very intimately, for his favourite walk was over the moor to our house. Know 
you aught of Spain, Sir Oliver?" 

"Nought, my sire, save that I have heard men say that there is a dish named an 
olla which is prepared there, though I have never been clear in my mind as to 
whether it was but a ragout such as is to be found in the south, or whether 
there is some seasoning such as fennel or garlic which is peculiar to Spain. 
When every man's grip is on his neighbor's throat, and every five-sous-piece of 
a baron is marching with tuck of drum to fight whom he will, it would be a 
strange thing if five hundred brave English boys could not pick up a living. By 
nature I am, I admit, somewhat fiery, and under provocation I am inclined to be 
violent. Now upon this plateau the future must ever be for man. The old 
soldiers of Crecy, of Nogent, and of Poictiers were glad to think that they 
might hear the war-trumpet once more, and gladder still were the hot youth who 
had chafed for years under the martial tales of their sires. Two great 
tiger-skins thrown athwart it increased the suggestion of Eastern luxury, as 
did a huge hookah which stood upon a mat in the corner. His thin figure and 
long limbs struggled and fluttered like a chicken being dragged from a coop. I 
had come to believe that he was an orphan with no relatives living, but one 
day, to my very great surprise, he began to talk to me about his brother. I 
never doubted that it would be with me still. " 

"Ah! that is suggestive. " 

He looked at me with a surprised face. The maid had entered with us, and began 
once more to foment the bruise upon her mistress's brow. He has been buying 
things for children, you perceive. He was a man of singular habits, shunning 
company and very seldom going out. A child! Barrymore had said that our unknown 
was supplied by a boy. But Maude and Alleyne care little for this. " 

"Wait a bit!" cried Gregson eagerly. " 

"I am immensely indebted to you. 

"And yet you have sent for me?" 

"Ah, yes, that's another matter--a mere trifle, but the sort of thing you take 
an interest in--queer, you know, and what you might call freakish. Of the 
double moats which had guarded its more warlike predecessor, the outer had been 
allowed to dry up, and served the humble function of a kitchen garden. Any one 
of these stone huts would give him a hiding-place. We had better go up at once. 
We had a doctor in this morning. When on the top of this I am able to show that 
the blood mark on the windowsill was deliberately placed there by Barker, in 
order to give a false clue to the police, you will admit that the case grows 
dark against him. 

"I have already told you that your reports reached me rapidly, being forwarded 
instantly from Baker Street to Coombe Tracey. Twice we nearly had collisions 
with other equally erratic vehicles, and I remember remarking to Summerlee that 
the standard of driving in London had very much declined. Another five minutes 
of wild galloping over the plain, and they were all back in their gorge, while 
their pursuers fell back before the rolling of drums and blare of trumpets, 
which seemed to proclaim that the whole army of the prince was about to emerge 
from the mountain passes. As the major expressed it, the smile had often been 
struck from his mouth, as if by some invisible hand, when he has been joining 
the gayeties and chaff of the mess-table. Monica in the Edgeware Road. Half a 
guinea if you do it in twenty minutes!' 

"Away they went, and I was just wondering whether I should not do well to 
follow them when up the lane came a neat little landau, the coachman with his 
coat only half-buttoned, and his tie under his ear, while all the tags of his 
harness were sticking out of the buckles. You will have a couple of hundred 
thousand each. " 

He picked out from his bundle a copy of the local Herefordshire paper, and 
having turned down the sheet he pointed out the paragraph in which the 
unfortunate young man had given his own statement of what had occurred. "There 
are mountains, and dry plains, and flash of arms and shouting of battle-cries. 
"I have every hope, however, that your horse will start upon Tuesday, and I beg 
that you will have your jockey in readiness. I am delighted to hear that they 
are unwarranted. On examining it, however, I found that this deposit was a 
comparatively small one, and that it formed a link between two very much larger 
ones upon the right and left--both of them, however, in the grounds of my 
neighbours. P. , and a landed proprietor. E. C. , from A. There is no reason, 
therefore, to think that money troubles have been weighing upon his mind. 

"You see," remarked Holmes, as we paced to and fro in front of the house, "this 
marriage rather simplifies matters. " 

"Ye have indeed come too late," said the prince, "seeing that the prize is 
about to be awarded; yet I doubt not that one of these gentlemen will run a 
course for the sake of honor with this cavalier of France. 

"Still here!" he snarled. "Anything more?" 

In silence Baynes led the way to the sink and held forward his candle. The 
limbs and body of some large, white bird, torn savagely to pieces with the 
feathers still on, were littered all over it. " As he spoke two men came down 
the garden path, from round the angle of the house. " 

"How did you word your inquiries?" 

"We simply detailed the circumstances, and said that we should be glad of any 
information which could help us. " 

"No one else in your room?" 

"No. 

"About sixty; but his constitution has been shattered by his life abroad, and 
he has been in failing health for some time. If it amuse you to bend it, well 
and good; but why should I strain and pull, when my little moulinet will do all 
for me, and better than I can do it for myself?" 

"I have seen good shooting with the prod and with the latch," said Aylward, 
"but, by my hilt! camarade, with all respect to you and to your bow, I think 
that is but a woman's weapon, which a woman can point and loose as easily as a 
man. On the issue of this question depended whether I should continue my work 
at Briony Lodge, or turn my attention to the gentleman's chambers in the 
Temple. We kept to our camp all day, therefore, Lord John busying himself, with 
such help as we could give him, in raising the height and thickness of the 
thorny walls which were our only defense. And we are making it dangerous for 
ourselves. Is it not pitiful? And here I find you, a man of sense, boggling 
about terms, when your client's future and honour are at stake. Hudson was 
right. She works it from the front, so that her shadow may never be seen. He at 
once stopped, too, keeping two hundred yards behind her. His life was 
irregular, but in one respect he was regularity itself. Huxtable, that you 
should have taken such a step without consulting him. In the meantime I will do 
a little quiet work at your own doors, and perhaps the scent is not so cold but 
that two old hounds like Watson and myself may get a sniff of it. There was the 
possibility that the murderer had done this, and had afterwards escaped by the 
window. Our choir will be dumb without you. 

I was so stunned by this sudden shock that for a time I must have nearly lost 
my reason. Even my dread of losing a client could not restrain me from showing 
my impatience. 

Three days later we were back in Baker Street together; but it was evident that 
my friend would be much the better for a change, and the thought of a week of 
spring time in the country was full of attractions to me also. 'I shall have to 
send in my papers. I would rather never allude to the past, for it is very 
painful to me. " 

"Your net and box would have told me as much," said I, "for I knew that Mr. " 

"It is extraordinary how credulous the peasants are about here! Any number of 
them are ready to swear that they have seen such a creature upon the moor. 

Holmes took a bundle of papers from his pocket. "It was but a feint. It biases 
the judgment. The coachman, a hard-faced, gnarled little fellow, saluted Sir 
Henry Baskerville, and in a few minutes we were flying swiftly down the broad, 
white road. 

"Seven yards windage, Hal," said one, whose hair was streaked with gray. 

"Midsummer madness!" snorted Summerlee. 

"The devil take your tongue, Wat!" shouted a tall young man, seizing the last 
speaker by the collar and giving him an admonitory shake. "I want you, Mr. 
During that time my wife and I have loved each other as fondly and lived as 
happily as any two that ever were joined. She is what we call in England a 
tomboy, with a strong nature, wild and free, unfettered by any sort of 
traditions. And yet even here we may discriminate. When a woman has been 
seriously wronged by a man she no longer oscillates, and the usual symptom is a 
broken bell wire. 

"There is only one point on which I should like a little more information," 
Sherlock Holmes said at last. 

"REIGN OF TERROR IN THE COAL AND IRON DISTRICT 

"Twelve years have now elapsed since the first assassinations which proved the 
existence of a criminal organization in our midst. " 

"My dear fellow! I congrat----" 

"To Milverton's housemaid. Paul! I cannot think that any family in the land 
would not be proud to take you among them, seeing that you come of so old a 
strain. "They bristle up together like a clump of lances. They are bringing 
forward shield and mantlet. You could not have made any slip in coming?" 

"I did exactly what you advised. You recognized her. The men were little red 
fellows, and had been bitten and clawed so that they could hardly walk. 

"Good heavens!" I cried; "how you startled me!" 

"Every precaution is still necessary," he whispered. 

"So early in the day too," said he. " 

"Yes, we have had an adventure during the night, and one which might have 
proved to be a serious one. " 

"Well, if you won't tell us we can't make you; but I'd be glad to know. 

"You remember," said he, "that some little time ago when I read you the passage 
in one of Poe's sketches in which a close reasoner follows the unspoken 
thoughts of his companion, you were inclined to treat the matter as a mere 
tour-de-force of the author. The human race is gone, extinguished in a day, but 
the planets swing round and the tides rise or fall, and the wind whispers, and 
all nature goes her way, down, as it would seem, to the very amoeba, with never 
a sign that he who styled himself the lord of creation had ever blessed or 
cursed the universe with his presence. " 

"One moment," Holmes interposed, "your statement is, I foresee, one of the most 
remarkable to which I have ever listened. " 

"Nay, it warmed my very heart to see it. On opening the Standard, however, I 
found that there was a fresh allusion to the business. What is there for us to 
do?" 

"To act, Sherlock--to act!" cried Mycroft, springing to his feet. 

"Good! What are you going to take, Mr. More than once they lost their way, but 
Hope's intimate knowledge of the mountains enabled them to regain the track 
once more. 

"'Oh, it's for my sake, not for yours,' he cried. 

"You do Sir Charles an injustice. Yet I cannot call to mind where it could have 
been. 

They soon had a proof, however, that they were still within the jurisdiction of 
the Saints. Leaning forward in the cab, he listened intently to MacDonald's 
short sketch of the problem which awaited us in Sussex. Then, with an angry 
gesture of his clenched hand, he closed the book, replaced it in the corner, 
and put out the light. Now, if you cared to apply, Mr. " 

"The moor is being scoured for these gypsies. " 

"Well, there are some on the stall with the gas-flare. What were your next 
steps? You examined the room, I presume, to see if the intruder had left any 
traces--any cigar-end or dropped glove or hairpin or other trifle?" 

"There was nothing of the sort. There were two guides given us to start with, 
an oak and an elm. You only want to get a glimpse of his face to see that. I 
did, as you say, after a restless night, set off early from my cottage. His 
appearance, you see, is so remarkable that no one can pass him without 
observing him. His eyes, which were of a peculiarly light, watery gray, seemed 
to always retain that far-away, introspective look which I had only observed in 
Sherlock's when he was exerting his full powers. 

"Come in, Sherlock! Come in, sir," said he blandly, smiling at our surprised 
faces. "What is it but a war between us and them, and we hit back where we best 
can. " 

"You'll have it, sir," said Douglas. Every last one of them, semaphore, lamp 
code, Marconi--a copy, mind you, not the original. It was all that the girl 
could do to keep herself in the saddle, yet a slip would mean a terrible death 
under the hoofs of the unwieldy and terrified animals. " 

The object which he held up to me was a small pocket or pouch woven out of 
colored grasses and with a few tawdry beads strung round it. "They have been 
turning out half-crowns by the thousand. " Several small punts and skiffs were 
lying about in the water and on the edge of the wharf. Here is half a sovereign 
for your trouble. Then they all moved on together. As a Pressman, I felt sure 
from what I had been told that I could never hope to get into touch with this 
cantankerous Professor. They sprang about, tossing their long, hairy arms in 
the air and howling with exultation. " 

"What explanation did she give of having answered the bell when Mr. " 

"Thank God for that. At two o'clock yesterday afternoon a small packet, wrapped 
in brown paper, was handed in by the postman. I have coursed many creatures in 
many countries during my checkered career, but never did sport give me such a 
wild thrill as this mad, flying man-hunt down the Thames. What amuses me is to 
think of Lestrade, who had started off upon the wrong scent. That the writer 
was on board of a ship. You have heard me speak of Professor Moriarty?" 

"The famous scientific criminal, as famous among crooks as--" 

"My blushes, Watson!" Holmes murmured in a deprecating voice. " 

"Your cases have indeed been of the greatest interest to me," I observed. 

The old man put on a very knowing expression. As you will readily understand, a 
specialist who aims high is compelled to start in one of a dozen streets in the 
Cavendish Square quarter, all of which entail enormous rents and furnishing 
expenses. Somewhere in the dark ooze at the bottom of the Thames lie the bones 
of that strange visitor to our shores. 

Many traces we found of him in the bog-girt island where he had hid his savage 
ally. "The rest of our work must be done, and every moment is of importance. 
May he share your hopes? He has nerves of steel, and yet I know that he has 
hardly slept since this terrible event. "He hugs it to him as the devil hugged 
the pardoner. All right, little chap, he's only a human, just the same as the 
rest of us. I went round to my employer, found him in the same dismantled kind 
of room, and was told to keep at it until Wednesday, and then come again. Was 
it not extraordinary? Puzzle as I would, I could make nothing at all of what it 
meant. " 

"Well, did you think of such a thing when you joined the Freeman's society at 
Chicago?" 

"No, I'm bound to say I did not. 

"He could not have gone far, sir bailiff," cried one of the archers, unslinging 
his bow. "They can see us and we cannot see them. "Everything depends upon our 
speed. Once safe in Carson we may rest for the remainder of our lives. Then 
there entered an inner guard with a green and gold sash across his chest. An 
instant later came the slam of the door and the turning of the key in the lock. 
and Mrs. You'll dine with us, Lestrade, and then you are welcome to the sofa 
until it is time for us to start. I couldn't have believed it if I hadn't seen 
it with my own eyes. Arthur Harry Pinner in the temporary offices of the 
Franco-Midland Hardware Company, Limited, would be a rather interesting 
experience for both of us. He would have cut his right hand off before he would 
sell a State secret confided to his keeping. He had once been a skilful 
sculptor and had earned an honest living, but he had taken to evil courses and 
had twice already been in jail--once for a petty theft, and once, as we had 
already heard, for stabbing a fellow-countryman. There is not an instant to be 
lost. " 

Lestrade looked sadly at my companion. I alighted and sent a message to Sir 
Henry that I should walk over in time for dinner. There is a second line of 
steamers which connect South Australia with England, but we will draw the 
larger cover first. We are at a loss as to how he came into the empty house; 
indeed, the whole affair is a puzzler. It was a rugged course, rocky and 
uneven, yet the two knights, choosing their men, dashed onwards at the top of 
their speed, while the gallant Spaniards flew as swiftly to meet them. There 
was nothing for it, however, but implicit obedience; so we bade good-bye to our 
rueful friend, and a couple of hours afterwards we were at the station of 
Coombe Tracey and had dispatched the trap upon its return journey. When, 
therefore, he suddenly announced his intention of setting out for the scene of 
the drama it was only what I had both expected and hoped for. Yet in some ways 
I feel that yesterday has not been wasted. Finally he discussed the matter with 
his fellow lodger. As it was impossible to take her on with us, we saw that she 
had all necessaries of life and promised to communicate with her in a couple of 
days at the latest. The inscription upon the paper was brief, but to the point: 



JOHN FERRIER, 

FORMERLY OF SALT LAKE CITY, 

Died August 4th, 1860. Scraps of popular songs were chorused with an enthusiasm 
which was a strange prelude to a scientific lecture, and there was already a 
tendency to personal chaff which promised a jovial evening to others, however 
embarrassing it might be to the recipients of these dubious honors. 

Thus, when old Doctor Meldrum, with his well-known curly-brimmed opera-hat, 
appeared upon the platform, there was such a universal query of "Where DID you 
get that tile?" that he hurriedly removed it, and concealed it furtively under 
his chair. " 

"That is so!" 

The worthy country policeman shook his head. It frightens me, Mr. 

"From the contents of the knapsack it was evident that this man had been an 
artist and poet in search of effects. Leonard's, in the great monastic barns 
and spicarium--ground well known both to Alleyne and to John, for they were 
almost within sight of the Abbey of Beaulieu. It had been no sudden call. We 
left her standing upon the thin peninsula of firm, peaty soil which tapered out 
into the widespread bog. " 

Ettie threw her arms round her lover's neck. Then these are your instructions, 
and I beg, my dear Watson, that you will obey them to the letter, for you are 
now playing a double-handed game with me against the cleverest rogue and the 
most powerful syndicate of criminals in Europe. You were thinking that if the 
portrait were framed it would just cover that bare space and correspond with 
Gordon's picture there. I want to buy them. There is no exit that way?" 

"No, sir. The face was turned half-round, and the effect was that of one of 
those black silhouettes which our grandparents loved to frame. The man, who has 
some work which he must do, desires to leave the woman in absolute safety while 
he does it. The long sweep of green water roaring forever down, and the thick 
flickering curtain of spray hissing forever upward, turn a man giddy with their 
constant whirl and clamor. I cannot doubt that Stapleton recruited his waning 
resources in this fashion, and that for years he has been a desperate and 
dangerous man. God be with you, friend, and may we meet again in better times!" 

"I do not think," said Sir Nigel, as he stood by Alleyne's side looking after 
the French knight and his lady, "that in all Christendom you will meet with a 
more stout-hearted man or a fairer and sweeter dame. I would ask the lodge to 
choose a trusty committee, Mr. " 

The colonel still stared at my friend like a man in a trance. I have seldom 
felt so happy as when I got your wire asking me to meet you at Harwich with the 
car. Begone, I say, and meddle not with my affair. " 

"If you leave me now," whispered the woman, "then shame forever upon your 
manhood. "That's how it stands. You come under lodge discipline if it goes 
further, and that's a heavy hand in these parts, as Brother Baldwin knows--and 
as you will damn soon find out, Brother McMurdo, if you ask for trouble!" 

"Faith, I'd be slow to do that," said McMurdo. 

"Well, you need a word as well as a set of figures before you can get the lock 
to work. 

"That's good enough. HUXTABLE'S SIDELIGHTS ON HORACE may possibly recall my 
name to your memories. 

"James came into contact with this fellow Hayes, because the man was a tenant 
of mine, and James acted as agent. "Hullo! Hullo!" he added as he looked hard 
at the corner of a tracing before putting it in the box. "This should put 
another bird in the cage. Watson, before whom you can speak as freely as before 
myself. " 

"Excuse my using your name," he said. The father was away in search of his son. 
'" 

"Then our friend Overton's forebodings have been justified," said Holmes. 

"Oh, yes; plenty. Holmes--you are mad!" she cried, at last. 

He drew a small piece of cardboard from his pocket. And what of this White 
Company, archer?" 

"Ah, sir, you speak of dogs," cried Aylward; "but there are a pack of lusty 
hounds who are ready for any quarry, if they have but a good huntsman to halloo 
them on. " 

"And he made you swear to say nothing about your appointment with Sir Charles?" 

"He did. 

"The reason was simple enough," said the dogged Summerlee. 

"What harm is there in the letters?" he asked. "When my term was over I set 
myself to get the diary and letters which, if sent to the Russian government, 
would procure my friend's release. It's the last that have the worst of it. " 

"Yes, yes. 

"Do you tell me," said the sergeant, "that the wedding ring was BELOW the 
other?" 

"Always!" 

"Then the murderer, or whoever it was, first took off this ring you call the 
nugget ring, then the wedding ring, and afterwards put the nugget ring back 
again. "What a nerve the fellow has! How he pulled himself together in the face 
of what must have been a paralyzing shock when he found that the wrong man had 
fallen a victim to his plot. Perhaps we shall come upon some other indications 
as we proceed. " 

Now that we had the clue to his action, each of us could cast back and remember 
some sinister act upon the part of the half-breed--his constant desire to know 
our plans, his arrest outside our tent when he was over-hearing them, the 
furtive looks of hatred which from time to time one or other of us had 
surprised. " 

"And what did they take?" 

"Well, they did not take much--only half a dozen articles of plate off the 
sideboard. It fills me with hopes. As I stood there, imagine my surprise, Mr. 
It was only a line asking me to join him when he made the sign to me to do so. 

"The main fact is that he HAD the pearl, and at that moment, when it was on his 
person, he was pursued by the police. 

"By the way," I asked suddenly, stopping and turning upon Stamford, "how the 
deuce did he know that I had come from Afghanistan?" 

My companion smiled an enigmatical smile. "I shall probably wish to go over the 
outside of the house again. " 

The explanation only brought uproarious merriment from Challenger. " 

"Well, it's only a reasonable walk to Chatham. As I focus my mind upon it, it 
seems rather less impenetrable. If her master had a visitor he had himself 
admitted him. " 

"For myself," said Sir Nigel, "I have heard such words fall from the lips of 
this lady that I am of the opinion that there is no woman, save only one, who 
can be in any way compared to her in beauty and in goodness. " 

Alleyne followed the messenger to the east end of the courtyard, where a broad 
flight of steps led up to the doorway of the main hall, the outer wall of which 
is washed by the waters of the Avon. The man was sitting up, blanched and 
ghastly, with returning reason in his eyes, and hands which rubbed nervously at 
the broad red band which still encircled his throat. 







Adventure IX. "Ah, the cowardly dogs! Follow me, gentlemen! Too late! too late! 
by the living Jingo!" 

We had broken suddenly into a lovely glade of greensward surrounded by ancient 
trees. " 

"Which of them?" asked Sir Nigel. James's end. 

"You want to go home, no doubt, Doctor," he remarked as we emerged. Holmes, 
that you are under some absurd illusion. Holmes," he said, turning the front of 
his coat and exhibiting the butt of a large revolver, which projected from the 
inside pocket. "How does this bear on the case?" 

"Well, it corroborates the young man's story to the extent that the will was 
drawn up by Jonas Oldacre in his journey yesterday. 

"Prove it! Are there not fifty murders to prove it? Vat about Milman and Van 
Shorst, and the Nicholson family, and old Mr. " 

"And why not Norwood?" 

"Because we have in this case one singular incident coming close to the heels 
of another singular incident. " 

"My good Hopkins, I have investigated many crimes, but I have never yet seen 
one which was committed by a flying creature. "Listen to this: 'You will see me 
when all is ready. Come at once. " 

Into the chamber they went in all peace and concord, where the Lady Tiphaine 
sat like queen on throne for each in turn to be presented to her. I glanced my 
eyes down it, catching a profusion of notes of admiration, with stray 
"magnifiques," "coup-de-maitres," and "tours-de-force," all testifying to the 
ardent admiration of the Frenchman. I am not at home. There was one singular 
exception, however, for he had a single room, a lumber-room up among the 
attics, which was invariably locked, and which he would never permit either me 
or anyone else to enter. Wait in patience. --NEVILLE. ' Written in pencil upon 
the fly-leaf of a book, octavo size, no water-mark. " 

So far my friend Macdona; and it may be taken as a fairly accurate, if florid, 
account of the proceedings. Then, with a gesture of desperation, he tore the 
mask from his face and hurled it upon the ground. 

The chamber in which we found ourselves was about ten feet one way and six the 
other. A finer first appearance had never been made in the lodge. On emptying 
this, Miss Cushing was horrified to find two human ears, apparently quite 
freshly severed. Three had been placed on one side. 

A very cheerful wood-fire was sputtering and cracking in an open grate at the 
further end of the apartment. That gives a radius of ten or twelve miles, and 
he does it once, or sometimes twice, a day. What do you make of that?" 

"Mortimer said that the man had walked on tiptoe down that portion of the 
alley. The Rucastles will be gone by that time, and Toller will, we hope, be 
incapable. But the creature flapped and struggled, and out came my sister to 
know what was the matter. If there be forest men or Hampshire men amongst ye, I 
call upon them to say whether they will follow the banner of Loring. " 

The brother scribbled a note upon a leaf of his pocket-book, and, ringing the 
bell, he handed it to the waiter. Holmes. 

"Miss Harrison," said Holmes, speaking with the utmost intensity of manner, 
"you must stay where you are all day. Lestrade, of Scotland Yard, very solemn 
and impressive, was ushered into our modest sitting-room. I had relied upon him 
to look after this. A single man could not have carried out two deaths in such 
a way as to deceive a coroner's jury. The younger ruler had sat listlessly upon 
his stool with the two puppet monarchs enthroned behind him, but of a sudden a 
dark shadow passed over his face, and he sprang to his feet in one of those 
gusts of passion which were the single blot upon his noble and generous 
character. " 

"Well, I am not so clear about that, Watson, for it is evident that they must 
either kill her or else secure her in such a way that she could not give 
immediate notice of their escape. But his eyes, like my own, are the worse for 
wars. He plunged instantly into his business. Suddenly he looked at his watch. 

"It's blocked!" said he. Colonel Ross met us by appointment outside the 
station, and we drove in his drag to the course beyond the town. Black cap. 

"One day a gold convoy came down from Ballarat to Melbourne, and we lay in wait 
for it and attacked it. From a cupboard he had brought an old cigar-box, and 
this he laid before him on the table. Next he drew forth a pair of boots. The 
other, clad in a dirty russet suit with a long sweeping doublet, had a cunning, 
foxy face with keen, twinkling eyes and a peaky beard. I saw the young occupant 
step out from it. My plans were already formed. On the next occasion, in the 
midst of my laughter, I put my handkerchief up to my eyes, and was able with a 
little management to see all that there was behind me. He did not attempt to 
deny that he had acted as described upon the evening before, but declared that 
he had no sinister designs, and had simply wished to obtain first-hand 
information. This villain was able to terrorize him the instant that he got 
into his presence. The door we will leave ajar. 

"He is possessed of a devil!" they shouted. 

"'Quite right! That's all right! But I was bound to ask. Think ye that ye have 
heart enough to clamber down this cliff?" 

"Had we but a rope. " 

"You were always a noble woman, Anna," said the old man, puffing at his 
cigarette. Twenty-six voyages. " 

"Dundee, I suppose?" 

"Yes, sir. Pardieu! I have never seen a man get off his horse as quick as did 
that stranger Englishman. Ere the words were past the other's lips he was 
beside him, his face nigh touching, and his breath hot upon his cheeks. Yet it 
is not every question that she can answer, but only those----" 

"Bertrand, Bertrand!" cried the lady in the same muttering far-away voice, "the 
blessed hour passes. The chargers spun round each other, biting and striking, 
while the two blades wheeled and whizzed and circled in gleams of dazzling 
light. The window, I may add, was not large enough for a man to get through. 
Voilà tout!" 

"And Miss Sutherland?" 

"If I tell her she will not believe me. You may remember the old Persian 
saying, 'There is danger for him who taketh the tiger cub, and danger also for 
whoso snatches a delusion from a woman. "For God's sake, have mercy!" he 
shrieked. "IT WAS DREADFUL IN THE FOREST" XIII. Draw on old lad, for I have 
come between you and the clout. " 

"On we went then," said Aylward, after a long pull at his blackjack. "Pray what 
did you do then?" 

"I should have followed him through the open window if I had been stronger. And 
you, sir? I can recommend them, for I have them especially prepared by Ionides, 
of Alexandria. You seem to know everything, so I expect that you know that I 
met her when she was a passenger and I was first officer of the ROCK OF 
GIBRALTAR. There was not one of them which I did not apply to the inquiry. All 
the bottom area round the water-edge was alive with their young ones, and with 
hideous mothers brooding upon their leathery, yellowish eggs. So, amid 
hand-shakings and laughings and blessings, Alleyne Edricson turned his back 
upon Beaulieu. 

Close at the heels of the horses came two-score archers bearded and burly, 
their round targets on their backs and their long yellow bows, the most deadly 
weapon that the wit of man had yet devised, thrusting forth from behind their 
shoulders. "I am saved! I am saved!" 

The reaction of joy was as passionate as his grief had been, and he hugged his 
recovered gems to his bosom. " 

"It is fortunate, for you will perhaps be able to post me up. You can now 
disappear from the scene. The matter may still be adjusted. At this sign of 
coming aid the clerk held on the tighter, and at last was able to pin his man 
down and glanced behind him to see where all the noise was coming from. It is a 
quarter of an hour's walk from there to Appledore Towers. If the case has had 
no other effect, it, at least, brings out in the most striking manner the 
efficiency of our detective police force, and will serve as a lesson to all 
foreigners that they will do wisely to settle their feuds at home, and not to 
carry them on to British soil. "It would cease to be a danger if we could 
define it," said he. Something has come into that room which has dashed the 
light of reason from their minds. Had some damaged photographs, said to be 
fakes. Was there a police-station anywhere near? There was one about three 
miles off. The old cab horse was coming up the hill! 

I was conscious at the same instant of the twittering of birds, of someone 
coughing in the yard below, and of a background of movement in the landscape. I 
inquired of him whether he had ever heard of Colonel Lysander Stark. I wonder I 
didn't drop. It is seldom that any man, unless he is very full-blooded, breaks 
out in this way through emotion, so I hazarded the opinion that the criminal 
was probably a robust and ruddy-faced man. " 

Simple Alleyne opened his eyes at this little spurt of feminine bitterness. " 

"The Bible!" I cried triumphantly. I have some recollection of once remarking 
to our young friend here that G. Soames. " 

"What could he have wanted there?" 

"I think it is clear enough. What a charming, old-fashioned room! Perhaps you 
will kindly wait a minute, until I have examined the floor. " 

"Deeply interested--yes. Father, I am much beholden to this young clerk, who 
was of service to me and helped me this very morning in Minstead Woods, four 
miles to the north of the Christchurch road, where I had no call to be, you 
having ordered it otherwise. " All this she reeled off in a loud voice, and 
then glanced with sidelong, questioning eyes at Alleyne for his approval. " 

"Open the window, then! You have been at your club all day, I perceive. Pray 
give my greetings to Mrs. A small place, miss, but furnished to my own liking. 

"Excuse me, sir," said he, "but am I addressing Dr. "I may even say exceptional 
features of interest. But from what you say we might perhaps be doing better 
work in London. It was not easy to pick one's steps, but, on the whole, I was 
inclined to dismiss the idea that there had been anything between the Colonel 
and Miss Morrison, but more than ever convinced that the young lady held the 
clue as to what it was which had turned Mrs. It was twenty-five minutes past 
four. Then I should be very glad to compare impressions as to this most 
interesting problem which has been submitted to us this morning. He's our man 
then. " 

"'"What are we to do, then?" I asked. " 

"Exactly--one of the richest men in Kent--Lady Brackenstall is in the 
morning-room. "I call her to mind now. " 

"What!  You were after Henderson?" 

"Why, Mr. You will find some books over there. " 

"Oh, Jack, it would be the saving of you!" 

"I'm an honest man in some things, Ettie. " 

"And as to the prize, sire," quoth Sir Nigel, "I am sure that I speak for all 
when I say this French knight hath our leave to bear it away with him if he can 
fairly win it. "I have been cloister-bred, and it was no very great matter to 
handle the brush better than my brother novices. Your kingly pledge is my 
security, without bond or seal. " 

Inspector Baynes's small eyes twinkled with pleasure. 

"Read it aloud," said he, indicating a column with his finger. The young chief 
walked at our head as our guide, but refused indignantly to carry any burden. 

"What a providential thing that this young man should press his right thumb 
against the wall in taking his hat from the peg! Such a very natural action, 
too, if you come to think of it. "This was overlooked because it was in the 
darkest corner of the room, and no one thought of looking there. I know him by 
that devil's touch upon his brow. " 

He examined the lock of the safe, the door of the room, and finally the iron 
shutters of the window. " 

"To Chandos? In God's name, Oliver, why have you done this?" 

"Because he and the other have used me despitefully. "Do you know how he died?" 

"No, sir, I don't know that. By St. She was bending over her knitting and 
stopping occasionally to stroke a large black cat upon a stool beside her. Ah!" 
He drew in his breath with a shrill, excited intake. In the dim light I saw his 
head thrown forward, his whole attitude rigid with attention. '" 















































































































































His Last Bow 

An Epilogue of Sherlock Holmes 









(Part of a collection of stories by Sir Arthur Conan Doyle published as a book 
entitled His Last Bow) 







It was nine o'clock at night upon the second of August--the most terrible 
August in the history of the world. " 

"If you dare open that swine's mouth against me," shouted the woodman, "I'll 
crop your ears for you before the hangman has the doing of it, thou long-jawed 
lackbrain. "Nothing here," he said, at last. "By the way, I suppose your friend 
was a healthy young fellow--nothing amiss with him?" 

"Sound as a bell. I suppose you know what you have got?" 

"A diamond, sir? A precious stone. " 

"Let us have everything in its due order. That fatal night Dr. I think we must 
admit that all the evidence points to this man, Mortimer Tregennis, having been 
the criminal in the first tragedy, though he was the victim in the second one. 
It fairly shook me, sir. But the beggar is certainly taking his time. Hewett, 
Cook, Johnson, Cunningham, your men are of the poop-guard. Thornbury, Walters, 
Hackett, Baddlesmere, you are with Sir Oliver on the forecastle. Simon, you 
bide with your lord's banner; but ten men must go forward. What did she do on 
re-entering her father's house?" 

"I saw her in conversation with her maid. " 

"Have they thought of looking outside the house?" 

"Yes, they have shown extraordinary energy. "Our minds will play us strange 
pranks, and bethink you that these words of the Lady Tiphaine Du Guesclin have 
wrought upon us and shaken us. " 

"I cannot say that," answered Alleyne. " 

"You fill me with interest," said Holmes. 

"Well, Mr. 

"Perhaps she could not or would not have told you much. Then the baronet gently 
opened his door and we set out in pursuit. " 

"I suppose the local investigation was relaxed while this false clue was being 
followed up?" 

"It was entirely dropped. Lucas opened it. What occurred during that time has 
not yet transpired, but at a quarter to twelve Police-constable Barrett, 
passing along Godolphin Street observed that the door of No. There should be no 
difficulty about that. Now keep your eyes open in this crowd for your friends 
of last night, though I very much fear that they are a good hundred miles off 
by now. " 

"Just as you wish, Mr. Mortimer--and this is important--the marks which you saw 
were on the path and not on the grass?" 

"No marks could show on the grass. " 

"Were they on the same side of the path as the moor-gate?" 

"Yes; they were on the edge of the path on the same side as the moor-gate. 
"Capital article this on free trade. Permit me to give you an extract from it. 
'Erected in the fifth year of the reign of James I, and standing upon the site 
of a much older building, the Manor House of Birlstone presents one of the 
finest surviving examples of the moated Jacobean residence--'" 

"You are making fools of us, Mr. Holmes!" 

"Tut, tut, Mr. You may have heard of any little reputation which I possess. 
You'll be more likely to get a confession out of him alone. " 

"Proud I am to hear it," McMurdo answered. Among these he rummaged and read, 
with intervals of note-taking and of meditation, until we were past Reading. " 

"It seems a singularly useless thing to steal," said Sherlock Holmes. " 

The man with the cross was down in an instant on his knees upon the ground, 
with hands clasped above him and his face shining with hope. He waved his hand 
to the sofa, and our palpitating visitor with his agitated companion sat side 
by side upon it. Never for an instant did we suspect that he had the whole 
secret hidden in his own breast,--that of all men he alone knew the fate of 
Arthur Morstan. Question clattered upon answer like a sword on a buckler. The 
ancients, the fathers of the Church, the moderns, the Scriptures, the Arabians, 
were each sent hurtling against the other, while the rain still dripped and the 
dark holly-leaves glistened with the moisture. 

"I fear that you'll have a long wait," Holmes whispered. 

"I told you that, whatever happened, Lestrade and Gregson would be sure to 
score. "Even the best of us are thrown off sometimes. " 

It was clear that it did. " 

"Who is the gentleman with the telescope?" 

"That is Rear-Admiral Baskerville, who served under Rodney in the West Indies. 
I have jotted down the form here, if you would not mind signing it. His 
masterful eyes travelled quickly with a questioning glance from face to face. 

"He had been with me for two years, and came with the best references, but he 
was a silent, morose man, not very popular either with masters or boys. 
Everywhere there were stern signs of the crudest battle of life, the rude work 
to be done, and the rude, strong workers who did it. It was a fight of the 
millions against the hundreds; and the cruellest part of it was that these men 
that we fought against, foot, horse, and gunners, were our own picked troops, 
whom we had taught and trained, handling our own weapons, and blowing our own 
bugle-calls. All sound had hushed in the audience and everyone was absorbed in 
the spectacle before them. There is a huge error which it may take some little 
time to rectify. At Issodun I and three Welshmen came upon a house which all 
others had passed, and we had the profit of it to ourselves. None of the other 
houses were inhabited, and that at which we stopped was as dark as its 
neighbors, save for a single glimmer in the kitchen window. I showed it to 
Elsie, and down she dropped in a dead faint. That he may be safely trusted to 
do, for although he is absolutely devoid of reason, he is as tenacious as a 
bulldog when he once understands what he has to do, and indeed, it is just this 
tenacity which has brought him to the top at Scotland Yard. Is that clear?" 

"It is very hard," said I. 

"If I have it," said she, "I owe it to you. Keep your distance and all is well. 
" 

Our friends had already secured a first-class carriage and were waiting for us 
upon the platform. And your journey, I trust that it was pleasant?" 

"As heart could wish. " 

The horses both of knights and squires were speedily lowered into a broad 
lighter, and reached the shore almost as soon as their masters. I should like 
an accurate description of him and any letters of his which you can spare. I 
ventured to say something to him about cooling medicine, but he turned on me, 
sir, with such a look that I don't know how ever I got out of the room. I know 
it, and I want you to start upon your work knowing it, too. I never doubted 
that it would be with me still. Kindly ring the bell!" 

Bannister entered, and shrank back in evident surprise and fear at our judicial 
appearance. ' 

"I did as I was told, and at the same instant Mrs. Holmes, and I carried the 
bird all the way to Kilburn. Besides, besides--" 

"Why do you hesitate?" 

"There is a realm in which the most acute and most experienced of detectives is 
helpless. It must be where she can lay her hands upon it. " 

"You say truly, brother," cried the prince, his eyes kindling at the thought. 

"Where there is as much more waiting for any brave lad to pick it up. From Dax 
to St. ' 



"And that's the story of the Musgrave Ritual, Watson. 'You can hardly expect us 
to exert ourselves to find another such opening for you. The thing is too great 
a one for us to hesitate. Only now, at the end of nearly ten years, am I 
allowed to supply those missing links which make up the whole of that 
remarkable chain. But it's over to-night, thank God, and I am the winner!" 

The seven pale, rigid faces looked up at him. There is a strong presumption 
that the person whom McCarthy expected to meet him at Boscombe Pool was someone 
who had been in Australia. Yet there they sat, driven clean mad with terror, 
and Brenda lying dead of fright, with her head hanging over the arm of the 
chair. The teachings of twenty years cried out against such license. Watson has 
already heard of it. And it was to be used for a delicate operation that night. 
Yet, with all this, you made me reveal what you wanted to know. " 

At this the man on the ground snarled up at him like a rat, while the other 
clenched his teeth, and shook his club, and looked down at him with murder in 
his eyes. 

"I cannot possibly advise you if you try to deceive me," said he. " 

"Tut! It was nothing," said he; but it burned and ached all the same. " 

"Not answer! But he will have an answer. " 

"I beg, sir, that you will change the subject. 

"Exactly, my dear Watson. On the table stood a dark-lantern with the shutter 
half open, throwing a brilliant beam of light upon the iron safe, the door of 
which was ajar. She had learned something of the death of the convict, and she 
knew that the hound was being kept in the outhouse on the evening that Sir 
Henry was coming to dinner. She departed then and the lights went out, and I 
was left squatting in the rhododendron-bush. " 

"Will you see him?" 

"My dear Watson, you know how bored I have been since we locked up Colonel 
Carruthers. " 

"No, a child could not be drowned in it. But it is a question of getting 
details. Hewett, Cook, Johnson, Cunningham, your men are of the poop-guard. 
Thornbury, Walters, Hackett, Baddlesmere, you are with Sir Oliver on the 
forecastle. Simon, you bide with your lord's banner; but ten men must go 
forward. " He opened the door and ushered in a lady and gentleman. Then he 
threw himself down into the chair opposite, and drew up his knees until his 
fingers clasped round his long, thin shins. Theresa was as cool as ice, and it 
was her plot as much as mine. We must make it appear that burglars had done the 
thing. I took the letters in in the morning, so there was no need for father to 
know. " 

"To such base uses do we come," said Lord John, smiling. Meanwhile, come what 
may, Colonel Moran will trouble us no more. Holmes. 

"Ask Lady Hilda Trelawney Hope if she will be kind enough to step up," said he. 
Just a trifle more, I fancy, Watson. " 

"Very good. 

"I confess that this is entirely new to me, your Grace. For centuries it had 
remained unchanged; but within the last few years its picturesque appearance 
and situation have attracted a number of well-to-do residents, whose villas 
peep out from the woods around. Then it was withdrawn as suddenly as it 
appeared, and all was dark again save the single lurid spark which marked a 
chink between the stones. Holmes, that ever I heard. I am only a simple Norfolk 
squire, but there is not a man in England who ranks his family honour more 
highly than I do. 

Our course now ran down Nine Elms until we came to Broderick and Nelson's large 
timber-yard, just past the White Eagle tavern. Would the Bodymaster see to it 
that suitable arrangements be made for their lodgings and comfort until the 
time for action should arrive? McGinty added that it was impossible for anyone 
to remain secret at the Union House, and that, therefore, he would be obliged 
if McMurdo and Scanlan would put the strangers up for a few days in their 
boarding house. "My constitution has not got over the Afghan campaign yet. How 
came these two men--if there were two men--into an empty house? What has become 
of the cabman who drove them? How could one man compel another to take poison? 
Where did the blood come from? What was the object of the murderer, since 
robbery had no part in it? How came the woman's ring there? Above all, why 
should the second man write up the German word RACHE before decamping? I 
confess that I cannot see any possible way of reconciling all these facts. His 
younger brother is a station master in the west of England. There is only one 
punishment in his code. Too narrow for anyone to pass through. " 

"As you both locked your doors at night, your rooms were unapproachable from 
that side. "Here it is," said he presently: 

"'Ku Klux Klan. That is Baskerville Hall in the middle. Now for the facts. Down 
they swooped, one on the right, one on the left, the sides and shrouds black 
with men and bristling with weapons. ' 

"We went down a winding stone stair, and my companion, striking a match, lit a 
large lantern which stood on a barrel in the corner. 

"'None or all,' I answered. "Jack McGinty is the boss there. " 

"What sort of a man is he?" McMurdo asked. 

"As to the latter part, I have no means of checking you," said I, "but at least 
it is not difficult to find out a few particulars about the man's age and 
professional career. It was not until the Ivernia was within five hundred miles 
of Southampton that the wireless messages from paper after paper and agency 
after agency, offering huge prices for a short return message as to our actual 
results, showed us how strained was the attention not only of the scientific 
world but of the general public. Come round here. Now, Aylward, crane thy neck 
and see what would have been deemed an old wife's tale when we first turned our 
faces to the wars. There will be enough to make every one of us rich men and 
great chiefs. And now let us consider another point. The possession of a grey 
garment was a third point which, granting the son's statement to be correct, 
was a certainty. " 

"I should have thought that even a limited knowledge of comparative anatomy 
would have helped to verify it," said Summerlee, bitterly. " 

"You were yourself struck by the nature of the injury as recorded by the 
surgeon at the inquest. " 

Sherlock Holmes smiled demurely. " 

"Let us see then if we can narrow it down. I am well persuaded that you did but 
jest with this lady, and that you will now permit her to leave your land either 
alone or with me as a guide, if she should need one, through the wood. With his 
savage eyes and bristling moustache he was wonderfully like a tiger himself. 
With a bellow of rage, Hordle John squeezed him limp in his huge arms; and 
then, picking him up, cast him down upon the floor with a force which might 
well have splintered a bone or two, had not the archer with the most perfect 
coolness clung to the other's forearms to break his fall. 

"My powerful and illustrious master," he began, "Charles, King of Navarre, Earl 
of Evreux, Count of Champagne, who also writeth himself Overlord of Bearn, 
hereby sends his love and greetings to his dear cousin Edward, the Prince of 
Wales, Governor of Aquitaine, Grand Commander of----" 

"Tush! tush! Don Martin!" interrupted the prince, who had been beating the 
ground with his foot impatiently during this stately preamble. "A pretty mess 
you've made of the carpet. Now, I have shot little of late, but there is 
Johnston here who will try a round with you for the honor of the Company. The 
other fellow is probably an Italian also, and a member of the Mafia. Now, I 
knew that it was not you who had brought it down, so there only remained your 
niece and the maids. Jabez Wilson here has been good enough to call upon me 
this morning, and to begin a narrative which promises to be one of the most 
singular which I have listened to for some time. But it was essential that they 
should use it soon, as it might be discovered, or the bullion might be removed. 
"  (All this in little gasps, with terrible struggles for breath between. 

"And why?" 

"Why should any one murder a man in so clumsy a fashion as by hanging him?" 

"That is what we have to find out. Yet, as there are many of us, and as the 
service may not be to the liking of all, I pray that those will step forward 
from the ranks who have the will to follow me. " 

"Nor is it," said Alleyne, "part of the teachings of that mother Church of 
which he had so much to say. Perhaps you cannot yourself recall how your 
reverie commenced?" 

"No, I cannot. " 

"I am full of curiosity. 

"Here he is, safe and sound behind me. 

There is no reason whatever to suspect foul play, or to 

imagine that death could be from any but natural causes. 

"'I feel that I owe you a great many apologies for my abrupt departure 
yesterday, doctor,' said my patient. "Never had I such cursed luck. A murrain 
on the bones! I have not thrown a good main since I left Navarre. I could see 
little of him, for he was gone like a flash. It is absolutely unique, and its 
value can only be conjectured, but the reward offered of 1000 pounds is 
certainly not within a twentieth part of the market price. There was much to 
look after, now that the lands of Minstead were joined to those of Twynham, and 
Alleyne had promised her that if she would but bide with his wife he would 
never come back to Hampshire again until he had gained some news, good or ill, 
of her lord and lover. 

Every minute that white woolly plain which covered one-half of the moor was 
drifting closer and closer to the house. "The door of death is indeed, as you 
said, hung with beautiful, shimmering curtains; for, once the choking feeling 
had passed, it was all unspeakably soothing and beautiful. We'll know before 
the day is out whether we have caught our big, leanjawed pike, or whether he 
has got through the meshes. " 

"I'll do my best, anyhow. Wait a bit! There is a fellow cutting peat up yonder. 
Bring him over here, and he will guide the police. " 

As he spoke, the knight-errant, who had remounted his warhorse, galloped 
forward to the royal stand, with a silken kerchief bound round his wounded arm. 
I am sorry to intrude, but you heard how earnestly Holmes insisted that I 
should not leave you, and especially that you should not go alone upon the 
moor. 

"Who--who's this?" he stammered. I was glad that he should go, for it seemed to 
me that he was farther from danger when he was away from home. " 

"I am aware of that, Professor Coram. The first is the making of Pycroft write 
a declaration by which he entered the service of this preposterous company. 
Sherlock Holmes, I have been struck by the difficulty which I have experienced 
in picking out examples which shall in every way answer my purpose. Watson. " 

"No, I confess that I see no connection. A very different Holmes, this active, 
alert man, from the introspective and pallid dreamer of Baker Street. So it was 
to-day. So intent were they upon each other that neither took note of his 
approach; until, when he was close upon them, the man threw his arm roughly 
round the damsel's waist and drew her towards him, she straining her lithe, 
supple figure away and striking fiercely at him, while the hooded hawk screamed 
with ruffled wings and pecked blindly in its mistress's defence. 

In spite of the danger from dinosaurs (which is not great save at night, for, 
as I may have said before, they are mostly nocturnal in their habits) I have 
twice in the last three weeks been over to our old camp in order to see our 
negro who still kept watch and ward below the cliff. I had not begun to 
undress, and I was sitting by the fire in my bedroom when I heard the report. 
When I touched him on the shoulder and warned him to come quietly with us, he 
answered us as bold as brass, 'I suppose you are arresting me for being 
concerned in the death of that scoundrel Drebber,' he said. ' 

"He often had a wild way of talking, so that I thought little of what he said. 
From a grove upon our left I could already see the high chimneys and the 
flag-staff which marked the squire's dwelling. Clatter of hoofs, clinking of 
weapons, shouts from the drunken brawlers, and high laughter of women, they all 
rose up, like the mist from a marsh, out of the crowded streets of the dim-lit 
city. 

One couple out of the moving throng especially engaged the attention of the two 
young squires, the more so as they were going in their own direction and 
immediately in front of them. His face flushed with anger, and his brows 
knotted over his blue Teutonic eyes. At the end of that time there was a 
universal rising against him. We were round after her in an instant, but she 
was already nearly at the bank. You see, there is not a glimmer of light in any 
of the windows, and everything is working splendidly. "  She opened a flat box 
as she spoke, and showed me six of the finest pearls that I had ever seen. What 
else?" 

"When we secure the men we shall get the treasure. 

"What has she been saying to you?" screamed the old man furiously. "I had an 
idea that he might, and I took the liberty of bringing the tools with me. If it 
were an Indian we could set it down as evidence of some pigmy race in America, 
but it appears to be a European in a sun-hat. " 

The interview left Sherlock Holmes very thoughtful, and several times in the 
next few days I saw him take his slip of paper from his notebook and look long 
and earnestly at the curious figures inscribed upon it. " 

"Have you any reason to suspect robbery?" 

"No, sir. 

Mr. " 

"Exactly. " 

"Lord John's observations are frequently exceedingly fanciful, and he is 
capable of attributing the most absurd reasons to the respect which is always 
shown by the most undeveloped races to dignity and character. The moment that 
Hilton Cubitt's broad back had disappeared through the door my comrade rushed 
to the table, laid out all the slips of paper containing dancing men in front 
of him, and threw himself into an intricate and elaborate calculation. You will 
excuse these remarks from one who, though a mere connoisseur of crime, is still 
rather older and perhaps more experienced than yourself. ' 

"'It's only four hours a day, and I should not think of leaving,' said I. And 
yet if it were on the lawn, I wonder that you did not hear it also. 

"There it is!" I cried. 'I see that you have only just moved in, so I thought 
that if I could be of any help to you in any--' 

"'Ay, we'll just ask ye when we want ye,' said she, and shut the door in my 
face. ' 

"'You shall learn nothing from me,' said he with a passion such as I should not 
have thought was in his nature. I think after breakfast we must make a little 
reconnaissance of Mrs. Let us take the little table first. " 

With bowed heads and steel caps in hand, the archers stood at their horse's 
heads, while Sir Simon Burley repeated the Pater, the Ave, and the Credo. Long 
lines of dull brick houses were only relieved by the coarse glare and tawdry 
brilliancy of public houses at the corner. Here and there tossed the white 
plume of the English helmet, rising and falling like the foam upon a wave, with 
the fierce gleam and sparkle ever circling round it until at last it had sunk 
from view, and another brave man had turned from war to peace. Always in front 
of us we heard the yelling and roaring which showed the direction of the 
pursuit. 

If there was one report there might be others, so I looked round the hut in 
search of them. "I think it is time now that we took our friend Lestrade into 
our confidence. Now, Watson, put your shoulder to it, and we shall see whether 
we cannot make our way in. If I could only use it to detach his wife--" 

"His wife?" 

"I am giving you some information now, in return for all that you have given 
me. You see my point?" 

Holmes sprang from his chair. " 

"Ah, yes. " 

"Modesty and a humble mind," said she, "are the very first and rarest gifts in 
page or squire. 

"All is lost!" he cried. On the contrary, from his point of view, any sudden 
change would be likely to draw attention to himself. They were animals, then, 
and not natives, who had made the inroad, for surely the latter would have left 
nothing behind. 

"The whole course of events," said Holmes, "from the point of view of the man 
who called himself Stapleton was simple and direct, although to us, who had no 
means in the beginning of knowing the motives of his actions and could only 
learn part of the facts, it all appeared exceedingly complex. I have already 
said that I do not believe that the Duchess would encourage so monstrous an 
action, but the lad had the most wrong-headed opinions, and it is possible that 
he may have fled to her, aided and abetted by this German. " 

Both opened their eyes at this, and stared at Alleyne with as much amazement as 
he had shown at them. 

"Well, of course it was obvious from the first that this Mr. Who knows?  Well, 
Watson, I will not offend your intelligence by explaining what is obvious. ' 

"'How can you tell me what you know is false?' I cried. Holmes, but when I got 
to that address it was a manufactory of artificial knee-caps, and no one in it 
had ever heard of either Mr. Father was a plumber in the Tottenham Court Road, 
and he left a tidy business behind him, which mother carried on with Mr. He is 
weary of this place where the fear of these people darkens our lives. He did, 
as a matter of fact, marry, and had one child, this fellow, whose real name is 
the same as his father's. The valise was London made, and the contents were 
British; but the man himself was undoubtedly an American. They sat side by side 
upon our paper-littered settee, and it was easy to see from their worn and 
anxious faces that it was business of the most pressing importance which had 
brought them. Oh, do not waste the so-precious time, but come!' 

"This time, at least, I did not scorn her advice. Holmes, I wish you would do 
as much for me. " 

"Perhaps not. He is a man of good birth and excellent education, endowed by 
nature with a phenomenal mathematical faculty. Shall I order that the nakirs 
sound, sire?" 

The prince nodded, and the trumpets rang out, while the champions rode forth 
one after the other, each meeting his opponent in the centre of the lists. 
Gregson?" 

The Londoner nodded. 

"The note is written upon ordinary cream-laid paper without watermark. 

I have no idea what backward sweep of memory had brought the matter fresh to 
his mind, or what freak had caused him to desire that I should recount it; but 
I hasten, before another cancelling telegram may arrive, to hunt out the notes 
which give me the exact details of the case and to lay the narrative before my 
readers. Baker Street was like an oven, and the glare of the sunlight upon the 
yellow brickwork of the house across the road was painful to the eye. It is a 
cold night, and I observe that your circulation is more adapted for summer than 
for winter. It's been owing him a long time, and he'll get it full and proper. 
But so long as I am in this chair we shall be a united lodge in word and in 
deed. 

"They will soon come now, Massa Malone. " 

"Ha! I had forgotten that there was ill blood betwixt you. Can you see those 
tracks upon the path?" 

"Yes, I can. " 

"I should indeed love to look upon them," Alleyne answered; "but I have come 
from Beaulieu for a purpose, and I must be true to my service, even as thou art 
true to thine. It was a corner house, and we chose it as commanding a view in 
every direction. We left her standing upon the thin peninsula of firm, peaty 
soil which tapered out into the widespread bog. Prendergast threw us over a 
chart, told us that we were shipwrecked mariners whose ship had foundered in 
Lat. There only remained the first mate, who was a bold and active man. " 

"I confess," said I, "that I do not quite follow you. "Mon Dieu! What! am I not 
the champion of the Bishop of Montaubon? Ah, could I have descended, could I 
have come down, ere he fled! Then you would have seen. You would have beheld a 
spectacle then. If they are innocent it would be a cruel injustice, and if they 
are guilty we should be giving up all chance of bringing it home to them. " 

"I did not say that I desired you to do it. The door swung heavily back, and a 
short, deep-chested man stood in the opening, with the yellow light of the 
lantern shining upon his protruded face and twinkling distrustful eyes. In a 
fit of anger, however, caused by some robberies which had been perpetrated in 
the house, he beat his native butler to death and narrowly escaped a capital 
sentence. On the other hand, Alleyne had used his weapons in constant exercise 
and practice on every day for many months, and being by nature quick of eye and 
prompt of hand, he might pass now as no mean swordsman. We had to pay a large 
sum to hush the matter up. Let us see how that will do. " 

"Nay, there is but one thing that can draw the sting, and that the future may 
bring to me. 

"That is where he put his foot in getting out. "Look to him! You shall be my 
witness. "They hardly rise above the common herd. The expression of his face 
froze the attention of the audience. He was simply what the porter described as 
a "medium-looking chap," a man of fifty, beard grizzled, pale face, quietly 
dressed. The young Swiss had gone too. 

"It was rather a queer position that we found ourselves in then. 

"'Answer me frankly,' he continued, 'for you will find it to your interest to 
do so. "How now, Sir Mayor? How of the clams and the scallops?" 

"By Our Lady! my sweet Sir Oliver," cried the mayor. "I should never have known 
you under that moustache, and I dare say you would not be prepared to swear to 
me. "Honestly, I cannot congratulate you upon it. Detection is, or ought to be, 
an exact science, and should be treated in the same cold and unemotional 
manner. You have attempted to tinge it with romanticism, which produces much 
the same effect as if you worked a love-story or an elopement into the fifth 
proposition of Euclid. " 

My mind filled with admiration for this extraordinary man. It is, of course, 
important for us to know which tracks may be Mr. It may or may not be connected 
with our inquiry, but we will follow it backwards before we go any farther. It 
was part of the fittings of the professor's own desk. I saw the flash of the 
blade quite distinctly. The bare sight of me was like a bullet through his 
guilty heart. S. " 

"And a man of precise mind, evidently. " 

"Could you ring him up?--thank you! And I should be glad to have change of this 
five-pound note. Yet the fact remains that the reader, who was a fine, robust 
old man, was knocked clean down by it as if it had been the butt end of a 
pistol. 

Ronald Adair was fond of cards--playing continually, but never for such stakes 
as would hurt him. 

"For that matter," said the other policeman, "I allow that hell must BE 
something like that. The assassin convinced them that any attempt to arrest him 
would lead to the publication of some hideous scandal. They led, however, in an 
indirect fashion to a singular and complex problem which gave my friend an 
opportunity of demonstrating the value of a fresh weapon among the many with 
which he waged his life-long battle against crime. There has, I fear, been 
preconcerted management here. He was a man with some amount of self-importance 
and a certain air of command. I caught one glimpse of his venomous, menacing 
eyes amid the white swirl of the waters. I am prepared to swear, and so is 
Bannister, that it was smooth and unstained. With their aid I am positive I 
could climb that detached pinnacle to the summit; but so long as the main cliff 
overhangs, it is vain to attempt ascending that. " 

Holmes and I put on our dress-clothes, so that we might appear to be two 
theatre-goers homeward bound. 

"What then?" asked the bailiff. " 

"Well, madam," Challenger answered, "it is a lucky chance that we happened to 
pass. 

"As a means of tracing him, if he wished to inquire about him from any third 
person. A prodigiously stout man with a very smiling face and a great heavy 
chin which rolled down in fold upon fold over his throat sat at her elbow with 
a pair of glasses on his nose, looking very earnestly at the ladies who 
entered. Holmes dashed into the crowd to protect the lady; but just as he 
reached her he gave a cry and dropped to the ground, with the blood running 
freely down his face. Holmes must find it all out for himself. " 

"It is my business. That will be easily arranged. 

Sherlock Holmes's eyes glistened, his pale cheeks took a warmer hue, and his 
whole eager face shone with an inward light when the call for work reached him. 
" 

So saying, Sir Nigel mounted the white horse of the Spanish cavalier, and rode 
quietly forth from his concealment with his three companions behind him, 
Alleyne leading his master's own steed by the bridle. "All is lost. I should be 
a better man if I did what you advise, but I shouldn't be quite George Edward 
Challenger. " 

"I may be very obtuse, Holmes, but I fail to see what this suggests. " 

"And you have touched nothing?" 

"Nothing. "Hast had small experience of war, if I may judge by your looks and 
bearing. " 

"From Wiltshire, friend," said she, in a quavering voice; "three days have I 
been on the road. For the rest, there is nothing which a sponge may not cure. I 
can exhibit to you from my portfolio a picture of that creature taken from life 
which would convince you----' 

"DR. Not a soul, not one soul, not my nearest and dearest, knew that I was 
playing it. But the gem of my collection is coming and there is the setting all 
ready for it. And Stapleton, where is he? He shall answer for this deed. Oh, 
yes, I am sure I shall. 

"'Why, what did you think?' I asked. The walls of his chest seemed to thrill 
and quiver as a frail building would do inside when some powerful engine was at 
work. Yes, Watson, there are good reasons to suspect that there has been a 
substitution of lodgers. McFarlane in at half-past nine. She had been awakened 
by the alarm of fire. 

"Your boy, Arthur, went to bed after his interview with you but he slept badly 
on account of his uneasiness about his club debts. Gregson pushed it open. 
There's three folk come out since he went in, but I'll swear he wasn't one of 
them. " 

"Who is he?" 

"Well, well, we score over you for once, Mr. The lower of the three is 
Gilchrist, a fine scholar and athlete, plays in the Rugby team and the cricket 
team for the college, and got his Blue for the hurdles and the long jump. The 
remains scattered about were fragments of the victims, which had been cut away 
in order to clear the stake for the next who might blunder in. After tripping 
and stumbling over these lumps of decay, I came suddenly against something 
hard, and I found that an upright post was firmly fixed in the center of the 
hollow. You have received your rent, and he is not a troublesome lodger, though 
he is certainly an unusual one. " 

"Then, how do you know?" 

"I see it, I deduce it. "Here you have the particular district which concerns 
us. In good sooth, I know not what I shall say to Master Witherton when I see 
the Itchen once more. The whole front was draped in of arms broke through the 
dark veil. 

"I thought he wouldn't face the fire," said Lord John, laughing, as he came 
back and threw his branch among the faggots. "You'll come with me, won't you?" 

"If I can be of use. 

"I'll choose my own time, mister. 

"You have really got it!" he cried, grasping Sherlock Holmes by either shoulder 
and looking eagerly into his face. We read the details in the papers, and, 
knowing that he had been a friend of our father's, we discussed the case freely 
in his presence. She has hardly been away from her home for a day during that 
time. As I had expected, she approached and leaned over the table to replace 
the vase. I think that was the chain of events, Mr. " 

"And to start to-morrow morning?" 

"If necessary. It has been the most jealously guarded of all government 
secrets. " 

Lady Loring, glancing up, saw in the fading light three companions walking 
abreast down the road, all gray with dust, and stained with travel, yet 
chattering merrily between themselves. I shall have the others, but he first. 
It is an old trick. Holmes had already drawn his revolver, and I whipped out 
mine at the sight of this savage, distorted creature. It was a homely little 
room, with a low ceiling and a gaping fireplace, after the fashion of old 
country-houses. A crumpled, disintegrated newspaper revealed itself as the 
Chicago Democrat, though the date had been obliterated. 

We were both swift runners and in fairly good training, but we soon found that 
we had no chance of overtaking him. This other comrade of mine is a right 
learned clerk, for all that he is so young, hight Alleyne, the son of Edric, 
brother to the Socman of Minstead. If you will examine the top of the cork, you 
will observe that the screw was driven in three times before the cork was 
extracted. I wonder what your friend Holmes would do if he were here. Then I 
put out my hand and was about to shake the man, who was still sleeping soundly, 
when a bell over his head rang loudly, and he woke with a start. My wife had 
gone over there, and had asked the servant to call her if I should return. I 
could not see her clearly enough to know more than that she was tall and 
graceful, with black hair, and clad in some sort of loose white gown. " 

We sat in silence for a moment. " 

"What was your idea, then?" 

"It seemed to me to be obvious that this Greek girl had been carried off by the 
young Englishman named Harold Latimer. I understand that you wrote to your son 
upon the day when this incident occurred. " 

"So you have. The local police had to be called in, they had to communicate 
with Scotland Yard, Hopkins had to go out, and he in turn had to send for me. 
Then it flashed through my mind that the pain of my death would depend very 
much upon the position in which I met it. Finally there was a creak from a 
chair, and the footsteps ceased. It was evening when he at last climbed down, 
with a final assurance that he would keep the Indians till next morning. As I 
set it down again, after having examined it, my heart leaped to see that 
beneath it there lay a sheet of paper with writing upon it. Through the haze I 
had a vague vision of Holmes in his dressing-gown coiled up in an armchair with 
his black clay pipe between his lips. For some miles they still followed the 
same lonely track, which led them through a dense wood, and then widening out, 
curved down to an open rolling country, such as they had traversed between 
Aiguillon and Cahors. " 

"Just as you like, Mr. 

"Wait a bit, Gregson," said Sherlock Holmes. It was one of four which stood 
back some little way from the street, two being occupied and two empty. What 
seems strange to you is only so because you do not follow my train of thought 
or observe the small facts upon which large inferences may depend. " 

"Have they thought of looking outside the house?" 

"Yes, they have shown extraordinary energy. " 

"Dear me, Mr. It's only what I have read. " 

"Your hands, my dear sir. As the weeks passed, however, they became fewer and 
less violent, as Alleyne's firm and constant nature gained sway and influence 
over the Lady Maude. I love and am loved by a better man than he. He intended 
to change his name altogether, draw this money, and vanish, starting life again 
elsewhere. They were admirable things for the observer--excellent for drawing 
the veil from men's motives and actions. They have been identified as her 
clothes, and it seemed to me that if the clothes were there the body would not 
be far off. He started home again, but the agent went with him. Suddenly, 
however, he broke out into a sharp, querulous cry. It is Professor Challenger, 
who had promised to see us off. The road by which Maple White had ascended was 
no longer available. Brunton had not been at work here. I tapped upon the 
floor, but it sounded the same all over, and there was no sign of any crack or 
crevice. But I have been running round making inquiries before I came to you. " 

"I cannot understand, Barrymore, how you came to conceal this important 
information. 

"The French are also very worthy men. Sherlock Holmes, I believe?" said she. As 
it opened there came a tumultuous rush into the hall, rapid feet clattered up 
the stair, and an instant later a wild-eyed and frantic young man, pale, 
disheveled, and palpitating, burst into the room. Challenger breathed two or 
three times with enormous gulps, his lungs roaring as he drew in the vital gas. 
Another day should bring some of our doubts to an end. Yet it was no time now 
to think of pain or ache. It is certain that there is a point where an ascent 
is possible. " 

"And what other nations have you seen in your travels, good sir?" asked Alleyne 
Edricson. There was the gentle rustle of a woman's dress. By the way, who is 
that?" 

Only one window showed a light behind them; in it there stood a lamp, and 
beside it, seated at a table, was a dear old ruddy-faced woman in a country 
cap. It was not as if the Barrymores had taken us into their confidence. 

"Douglas!" he stammered. You are acquitted, Captain Crocker. Douglas. He puts 
down the candle. I must admit, however, that I was somewhat surprised when, 
some five days after the crime, I opened my morning paper to find in large 
letters: 

THE OXSHOTT MYSTERY A SOLUTION ARREST OF SUPPOSED ASSASSIN 

Holmes sprang in his chair as if he had been stung when I read the headlines. 
10 from Waterloo. Plays the violin well. 11. Is an expert singlestick player, 
boxer, and swordsman. " 

"Oliver! Oliver! You are mad!" 

"Not I, i' faith! I care not a denier whether he be prince or no. There was no 
light save in the dining-room, but Holmes caught up the lamp and left no corner 
of the house unexplored. " 

"No sign of it?" 

"Absolutely none. " 

"Then I fail to follow your Majesty. " 

"Same in a battle," remarked Lord John. The inspector hurried away on the 
instant to make inquiries about the page, while Holmes and I returned to Baker 
Street for breakfast. He can give no explanation of the young man's last words, 
'The professor--it was she,' but imagines that they were the outcome of 
delirium. 

"Quick, young fellah!  Quick!" he cried. "It is no wonder that it did not wake 
you. I tell you that no living man has any right to it, unless it is three men 
who are in the Andaman convict-barracks and myself. " 

"There is no other claimant, I presume?" 

"None. " 

Mr. "What do you imagine that it means?" 

"I have no data yet. Charpentier paused," the detective continued, "I saw that 
the whole case hung upon one point. Fixing her with my eye in a way which I 
always found effective with women, I asked her at what hour her son returned. 

"'I do not know,' she answered. The seven men sat frozen in their seats. Look 
how the water is still oozing into that deeper print!  By Jove!  See, here is 
the mark of a little one!" 

Sure enough, smaller tracks of the same general form were running parallel to 
the large ones. Lie down there on the sofa, and see if I can put you to sleep. 
" 

He took up his violin from the corner, and as I stretched myself out he began 
to play some low, dreamy, melodious air,--his own, no doubt, for he had a 
remarkable gift for improvisation. For some time back Mawson & Williams, the 
famous financial house, have been the guardians of securities which amount in 
the aggregate to a sum of considerably over a million sterling. Their glance 
fell upon Alleyne, and he could not withstand the mute appeal which he read in 
them. The lobes of their ears, hanging ragged and bloody, showed that they had 
been pierced for some ornaments which their captors had torn out. " 

"There have," said I, "been numerous petty thefts. The prince smiled at the 
martial ardor which shone upon every face around him. " 

He smiled serenely. "What does he do for a living?" 

"He is a rich man. Holmes?" 

"We have had a very busy day, and not entirely a wasted one," my friend 
explained. 

"Oh, the mystery!" he answered, coming back with a start to the realities of 
life. "And yet we manage to make ourselves fairly happy, do we not, Beryl?" 

"Quite happy," said she, but there was no ring of conviction in her words. Pull 
it out, or by the Lord that made me--There, that will do. Now, let us get down 
to business. 

"And yet there is much in what the Gascon says," said a swarthy fellow in a 
weather-stained doublet; "and I for one would rather prosper in Italy than 
starve in Spain. McFarlane," said he, pushing his case across. "I am sure that, 
with your symptoms, my friend Dr. By the way, Sherlock, I expected to see you 
round last week, to consult me over that Manor House case. The man in the road 
was undoubtedly some friend of hers--possibly her fiancé--and no doubt, as you 
wore the girl's dress and were so like her, he was convinced from your 
laughter, whenever he saw you, and afterwards from your gesture, that Miss 
Rucastle was perfectly happy, and that she no longer desired his attentions. 

Holmes had taken out his watch, and as minute followed minute without result, 
an expression of the utmost chagrin and disappointment appeared upon his 
features. 

He roared with amusement when he saw the oxygen cylinders upon the porter's 
trolly behind us. Barker; but it would come with a better grace from you. " 

"Oh, you think so, do you? Well, all I can say is that if there's any secret 
here it is not my secret, and I am not the man to give it away. "Did she not 
break into lamentation and woe that a brother should so demean himself?" 

"Nay, she smiled sweetly upon him and thanked him. "I am sorry that I have not 
been able to bring your Majesty's business to a more successful conclusion. And 
yet it is so real with me, so entirely part of my very self, that I cannot help 
acting upon it. " 

Our old chambers had been left unchanged through the supervision of Mycroft 
Holmes and the immediate care of Mrs. Sitting upon a rock, with his burning 
brow resting upon his hands, he thought of his brother, of their quarrel, of 
the Lady Maude in her bedraggled riding-dress, of the gray old castle, of the 
proud pale face in the armory, and of the last fiery words with which she had 
sped him on his way. Mrs. Tangey drinks, and our woman has been with her twice 
when she was well on, but she could get nothing out of her. " 

"I understand that they have had brokers in the house?" 

"Yes, but they were paid off. " 

"A beautiful neighbourhood, and full of the most interesting associations. 
Don't you see, my young friend, that they were very anxious to obtain a 
specimen of your handwriting, and had no other way of doing it?" 

"And why?" 

"Quite so. Hilton Cubitt was seriously injured, and is at death's door. The 
bullet had passed through the front of her brain, and it would probably be some 
time before she could regain consciousness. You quote an isolated sentence from 
my lecture, and appear to have some difficulty in understanding it. " 

"No, I think that I'll take it. My submission pleased him and led him to 
further confidences. If Mycroft has given us the list of addresses we may be 
able to pick our man and follow two tracks instead of one. " 

"Our course now seems pretty clear," said I. But I bring you this letter from 
the valiant Gascon knight, Sir Claude Latour. 

The story was told and retold amid cries of delight and shouts of laughter. 
"You are talking insanely. The soles which you are at this moment presenting to 
me are slightly scorched. They had scarce reached it, however, ere they found 
that the wooden joists and planks of the flooring were already on fire. It's 
three or four miles from here. And now I'll be too late with a murder done on 
my own doorstep. Was he also out in that deluged--the unseen watcher, the man 
of darkness? In the evening I put on my waterproof and I walked far upon the 
sodden moor, full of dark imaginings, the rain beating upon my face and the 
wind whistling about my ears. We humoured him too much when he was a lad and 
gave him his own way in everything until he came to think that the world was 
made for his pleasure, and that he could do what he liked in it. To continue 
our reasoning: if these people did not go by the road, they must have traversed 
the country to the north of the house or to the south of the house. Heaven, 
too, was very near to them in those days. God's direct agency was to be seen in 
the thunder and the rainbow, the whirlwind and the lightning. Let us on, for a 
stoup of wine would hearten us upon our way. Yes, here we are--three days 
later. Barnicot his two statues. Disgraceful, sir! A Nihilist plot--that's what 
I make it. No one but an anarchist would go about breaking statues. In our own 
case the excellent engines of the Esmeralda could disregard the sluggish flow 
of the stream, and we made as rapid progress as if we were navigating a 
stagnant lake. Merryweather, we must put the screen over that dark lantern. " 

"We're hunting in couples again, Doctor, you see," said Jones in his 
consequential way. And no later than this morning. Thank you. You will please 
keep your distance. 

"These two men, close and confidential friends, are the centre of the 
household; but there is one other person who for our immediate purpose may be 
even more important. They were reticent, however, as to the immediate job in 
hand. " 

"Were these men Americans--Californians?" 

"Well, I don't know about Californians. It is just possible, however, that that 
also may not be wanting in this new investigation. And yet here was the world 
resuscitated--here was life come back in an instant full tide to the planet. 
From Orwell to the Dart there was no port which did not send forth its little 
fleet, gay with streamer and bunting, as for a joyous festival. A crowd of 
white-faced sewers and pages swarmed at their heels, those behind pushing 
forwards, while the foremost shrank back from the fierce faces and reeking 
weapons of the adventurers. He had not heard her when she pushed open the door. 
The idea was in his head, since he spoke about it. 

"My rings were put on his finger; but when it came to the wedding ring," he 
held out his muscular hand, "you can see for yourselves that I had struck the 
limit. 

"You shall smart for this!" Stangerson cried, white with rage. There he goes 
again! PERI. Before I left I bethought me that if I ever met my Sikh friends 
again it would be a satisfaction to know that I had left some mark of our 
hatred:  so I scrawled down the sign of the four of us, as it had been on the 
chart, and I pinned it on his bosom. They had seen no signs of any pursuers, 
and Jefferson Hope began to think that they were fairly out of the reach of the 
terrible organization whose enmity they had incurred. " 

"What would ye think of offering up prayer?" the man asked diffidently. 

"Holmes!" I cried. 

"'Not at all. 

Barrymore looked surprised, and considered for a little time. ("No, no," from a 
sceptical student in the back row. )  If the young gentleman in the red tie who 
cried "No, no," and who presumably claimed to have been hatched out of an egg, 
would wait upon him after the lecture, he would be glad to see such a 
curiosity. )  "Did you venture to call me a liar?"  ("No, sir, no!" shouted the 
accused, and disappeared like a jack-in-the-box. Will you accredit one or more 
of your own number to go out as your representatives and test my statement in 
your name?" 

Mr. 

"Tut, John," whispered Aylward, "you never were a marksman. He's off again," 
said my companion, in a tone of relief. He passes under the name of Steve 
Wilson, and he is lodging at Hobson's Patch. Therefore he is at Mapleton. John 
Douglas himself could be, and the balance of probability was that with the 
connivance of his wife and his friend he was concealed in a house which had 
such conveniences for a fugitive, and awaiting quieter times when he could make 
his final escape. " 

"Ah, Mr. Since, however, we had already determined that Small had come from the 
Andamans, it is not so very wonderful that this islander should be with him. No 
doubt we shall know all about it in time. She would have come. She knows 
everything now, and I would have been a wiser man if I had told her sooner. 

"He found a way out of his difficulties through the chance that Sir Charles, 
who had conceived a friendship for him, made him the minister of his charity in 
the case of this unfortunate woman, Mrs. McMurdo, who had already been 
appointed Inner Deacon, with every prospect of some day succeeding McGinty as 
Bodymaster, was now so necessary to the councils of his comrades that nothing 
was done without his help and advice. Baldwin?" 

The young men nodded in surly fashion to each other. 

"Maybe Miss Ettie has told you how it is with us?" said Baldwin. "I never saw 
anything like it. " 

He took from his pocket the various slips of the dancing men. He will not try 
to escape. I came next, and tried hard not to look down into the horrible gulf 
over which I was passing. I was perfectly certain that he had some powerful 
enemies, that he believed they were on his track, and that he was always on his 
guard against them. McArdle, and I leave it to your discretion to delete, 
alter, or do what you like with it. 











"A Procession!  A Procession!" 

I should wish to place upon record here our gratitude to all our friends upon 
the Amazon for the very great kindness and hospitality which was shown to us 
upon our return journey. Watson," said he as he came panting up to where I 
stood. "My brother and I were very much shocked by the death of Sir Charles. On 
the other hand, we are bound to inform the police of the discovery, and to see 
that this poor fellow's body is looked after. We had to pay a large sum to hush 
the matter up. Holmes, and you must tell us exactly what you would like done. " 

"Nor have I any desire to do you an injury, Dr. 

"It must be a stricken deer," said John. 

The maid looked aslant at him with laughing eyes. Phelps, sir!' said he, 
looking at me in bewilderment. " 

"I feared that you would find it beyond you. 

"There are three hundred pounds in gold and seven hundred in notes," he said. 
Allen as a witness. As to the other servants, they had all gone to bed, and the 
alarm did not reach them until just before the police arrived. I had a vision 
of a cotton stocking and an elastic-sided boot. 

Worn with pain, and weak from the prolonged hardships which I had undergone, I 
was removed, with a great train of wounded sufferers, to the base hospital at 
Peshawar. Sherlock Holmes, I believe?" said she. He looked across at me, as I 
stirred, and I noticed that his face was dark and troubled. It was a tall 
order, that; but as the bridge was up there was no other way. There was a low, 
sibilant rise and fall--the breathing of the creature. Holmes, in the 
conjecture which seemed to us to be probable in your rooms at Baker Street. But 
I commend the idea to your mind. Find what I owe, Watson. I am all off colour. 
Good-bye!" She turned and had disappeared in a few minutes among the scattered 
boulders, while I, with my soul full of vague fears, pursued my way to 
Baskerville Hall. She wheeled her mustang round, gave it a cut with her 
riding-whip, and darted away down the broad road in a rolling cloud of dust. 
The people at the inn were alert all night, awaiting his coming, and one or 
other of them seems to have continually had an eye upon the road. The chances 
are that she would be as averse to its being seen by Mr. The clerk's mind was 
on his brother, on his future--above all on this strange, fierce, melting, 
beautiful woman who had broken so suddenly into his life, and as suddenly 
passed out of it again. Then I made my way to town and called at the Spanish 
embassy. 

"It has been a case of considerable interest," he remarked, returning to his 
natural manner. Smith?"  Holmes whispered. "I hardly dared hope that you would 
come. I can ill afford to lose another. " 

She swept across the room and seated herself with her back to the window. " 

"I do not wish to make a mystery," said he, laughing. It is absurd to suppose 
that you have two enemies, one of whom robs you, while the other threatens your 
life. " 

"And the florid face?" I asked. The new dance was in this form: 



GRAPHIC 



"Tell me," said Holmes--and I could see by his eyes that he was much 
excited--"was this a mere addition to the first or did it appear to be entirely 
separate?" 

"It was on a different panel of the door. But the incident is an admirable 
starting-point for an investigation. It was clear to me, from the strength of 
the glasses, that the wearer must have been very blind and helpless when 
deprived of them. There was no furniture save a little pallet bed, a small 
table, and a basketful of linen. It was frozen over, but a single hole was left 
for the convenience of a solitary swan. "Well," he insisted, turning to me, 
"what is it, then?" 

"This man attacked me," said I. 

"Did you attack him?" asked the policeman. 

"I'll go into that later. I have heard that Montpezat is of no great strength, 
and that there are two hundred thousand crowns in the castle. I made away 
across the garden, and as I went I heard the window shut behind me. I stood at 
the door for a few minutes, and now I am quite myself again. Lyons. However, 
both of them were under his influence, and he had nothing to fear from them. " 

"Surely," said I, "the man's appearance would go far with any jury?" 

"That is a dangerous argument my dear Watson. Kindly walk clear of the path. ' 

"I did as I was told, and at the same instant Mrs. ' 

"'Tut, my boy; you know about figures. Hum! Posted to-day in Gravesend by a man 
with a dirty thumb. Best quality paper. Envelopes at sixpence a packet. 
Particular man in his stationery. No address. That was the mayor of a 
provincial town with whom I talked when we first arrived. The man is a 
striking-looking fellow, very well equipped to steal the heart of a country 
girl, so that this theory seemed to have something to support it. So that's our 
line of advance. " 

"Warm! You'd be as warm, maybe, if you were as pestered as I am. With your 
permission, Miss Stoner, we shall now carry our researches into the inner 
apartment. I will endeavour, in my statement, to avoid such terms as would 
serve to limit the events to any particular place, or give a clue as to the 
people concerned. You saw the things I had with me at yonder hostel: name which 
you will, save only the box of rose-colored sugar which I take to the Lady 
Loring, and you shall have it if you will but come with me to France. 

"That's good enough. 

The paper was covered with the tracings of the foot-marks of some small animal. 
Phelps--curried fowl or eggs, or will you help yourself?" 

"Thank you. I can eat nothing," said Phelps. I have often seen them there. Look 
at that mark upon the seat of the oaken chair! What is it?" 

"Blood. Murder at Mawson & Williams's. Horace Harker had got his account into 
print after all. Don't you think so?" 

"No doubt; and yet it is not quite the way in which I should approach the case. 
Permit me to give you a sample. 

'You may be cajoled into imagining that your own special trade or your own 
industry will be encouraged by a protective tariff, but it stands to reason 
that such legislation must in the long run keep away wealth from the country, 
diminish the value of our imports, and lower the general conditions of life in 
this island. "I've a cab at the door, and it won't take us twenty minutes to 
Victoria. Who are you that you should take it on yourself to ask such things?" 
His gray eyes gleamed with sudden and dangerous anger from behind his glasses. 
It may be that we are condemned to spend our whole lives in this strange, 
inaccessible place. " 

"Your nerve, Walters?  I should not have thought you had a nerve in your body. 
Then the strong, soothing hand of the austere maid drew her head down on to the 
cushion, and the wild anger died away into passionate sobbing. Finally there 
was a creak from a chair, and the footsteps ceased. 

"No, I couldn't do it, Watson," said he, as we reentered our room. 

"What are we here for at all? I really think that you might treat us with more 
frankness. "You can put that consideration out of the question. The sulky dogs 
would rather have three twists of a rack, or the thumbikins for an hour, than 
pay out a denier for their own feudal father and liege lord. He was simply what 
the porter described as a "medium-looking chap," a man of fifty, beard 
grizzled, pale face, quietly dressed. You were not aware of any hurrying feet 
on the stair as you entered the outer door?" 

"No, I can't say I was. Well, we have seen the natives themselves. I'll offer 
him all the secrets of the lodge for a price. Just give me the material and I 
will engage to brand the fellow for ever. 

"Mr. I dare say you would find a heap of Smalls living there now if you were to 
look. " 

"If that be sign of sin, then, by Saint Paul! I have much upon my soul," said 
Sir Nigel, amid a general laugh. I tell you that he is a clever and dangerous 
man. I could see from Miss Morstan's manner that she was suffering from the 
same feeling. After I had graduated I continued to devote myself to research, 
occupying a minor position in King's College Hospital, and I was fortunate 
enough to excite considerable interest by my research into the pathology of 
catalepsy, and finally to win the Bruce Pinkerton prize and medal by the 
monograph on nervous lesions to which your friend has just alluded. To Alleyne 
and to John, however, it appeared to be as great and as stout a fortress as 
could be built by the hands of man. Heaven, too, was very near to them in those 
days. God's direct agency was to be seen in the thunder and the rainbow, the 
whirlwind and the lightning. Let us on, for a stoup of wine would hearten us 
upon our way. " 

The road in which we found ourselves as we turned round the corner from the 
retired Saxe-Coburg Square presented as great a contrast to it as the front of 
a picture does to the back. " 

"Are you not the author of a monograph upon obscure nervous lesions?" I asked. 
Why should it break three inches from the top, as this one has done?" 

"Because it is frayed there?" 

"Exactly. Under the long green-paved avenues of gnarled oaks and of lichened 
beeches the white-robed brothers gathered to the sound. If the chief 
constructor of the Navy desired to consult them, even he was forced to go to 
the Woolwich office for the purpose. " 

This loud speech, coming from a man of so formidable an appearance, somewhat 
daunted the disloyal party, and they fell into a sullen silence, which enabled 
Alleyne to hear something of the talk which was going on in the further corner 
between the physician, the tooth-drawer and the gleeman. "I wish to have a 
quiet word with you, Bradstreet. Is there any small matter in which I may 
oblige you?" 

"Since you ask me," said the man-at-arms, "I would take it kindly if you could 
spare a link or two of the chain which hangs round your neck. " 

"Well, then, in the first place I shall want a fast police-boat--a steam 
launch--to be at the Westminster Stairs at seven o'clock. As we advanced 
together through the woods we found the ape-men lying thick, transfixed with 
spears or arrows. " 

"Dog!" cried the furious Socman, "there is no man in the south who can say as 
much. "That is the great Grimpen Mire," said he. " 

"I had to. The puny plot of the story was so thin, however, when compared to 
the deep mystery through which we were groping, and I found my attention wander 
so continually from the action to the fact, that I at last flung it across the 
room and gave myself up entirely to a consideration of the events of the day. 
He stopped when he saw us, and then came on again. She showed it to me, Watson, 
and it was an Indian rupee. McCarthy and his son, and that they appeared to be 
having a violent quarrel. I braved him to do his worst. Now, what did you 
gather from that woman's appearance? Describe it. In the first place, I may 
tell you that Moriarty rules with a rod of iron over his people. North of 
Maryland the effect was not yet marked, and in Canada it was hardly 
perceptible. Belgium, Holland, and Denmark had each in turn been affected. 
Despairing messages were flashing from every quarter to the great centres of 
learning, to the chemists and the doctors of world-wide repute, imploring their 
advice. The astronomers too were deluged with inquiries. Mrs. Rucastle, 
however, who has evidently no sense of humour, never so much as smiled, but sat 
with her hands in her lap, and a sad, anxious look upon her face. 'Is he not a 
beauty?' 

"I looked through and was conscious of two glowing eyes, and of a vague figure 
huddled up in the darkness. Address to Mr. Cushing, Cross Street, Croydon. '  
Done with a broad-pointed pen, probably a J, and with very inferior ink. The 
passage outside was empty. " 

"You have found a way up?" 

"I venture to think so. " 

"Yes, I was always quick of speech. You have made your statement very clearly. 
But you've got mixed, Watson, for I have only been here a few hours, three 
pipes, four pipes--I forget how many. You must be weary, for you have had a 
long day. How say you, sire?" he asked, turning to the Spanish refugee, while 
the herald of Navarre was conducted from the chamber by the old warrior. By my 
hilt! camarades, I think that I may let my plunder speak for itself. " 

"And the men of Spain?" 

"They too are very hardy soldiers, the more so as for many hundred years they 
have had to fight hard against the cursed followers of the black Mahound, who 
have pressed upon them from the south, and still, as I understand, hold the 
fairer half of the country. "I can tell it to you all in one sentence," said 
he. No one ever needed your advice more than I do. 

"Well, I suppose it would," said Lord John. I have heard the minstrels sing of 
one Sir Roland who was slain by the infidels in these very parts. " 

"Was the blood-stain above or below?" 

"On the side next the boards. His drawn brows and the deep furrow between them 
showed that he needed no exhortation to concentrate all his attention upon a 
problem which, apart from the tremendous interests involved must appeal so 
directly to his love of the complex and the unusual. His eyebrows were tufted 
and overhanging, which gave those naturally cold eyes an almost ferocious 
aspect, an impression which was increased by his strong and furrowed brow. 
Round his brow he had a peculiar yellow band, with brownish speckles, which 
seemed to be bound tightly round his head. They each led into an empty room, 
dusty and cheerless, with two windows in the one and one in the other, so thick 
with dirt that the evening light glimmered dimly through them. Good-bye, my own 
darling--good-bye. In two months you shall see me. One of them snatched my 
firelock up and levelled it at my head, while the other held a great knife to 
my throat and swore between his teeth that he would plunge it into me if I 
moved a step. " 

"But we haven't opposed him yet," her father answered. "So far as I am a judge 
this human bone is the analogue of the one which you hold in your hand. " 

Challenger waved him away with his great hairy hand. " 

"Did you look at these papers on the table?" 

"No, sir--certainly not. "But I pray you, good youth, to tell us whether you 
are a learned clerk, and, if so, whether you have studied at Oxenford or at 
Paris. But there is a cartel pinned upon his breast, and I pray you, Alleyne, 
to read it to me. " 

"There are half a dozen about here that I have a word to say to," said McMurdo, 
with an oath. " 

"What then?" 

"I will get her to show me. " 

"I see many objections to any such theory. "See, there is Bertrand himself, 
beside his banner, and there is King Henry, who rides to welcome him. "It is my 
business, and not yours. But for the fortunate chance of the dying man having 
seized these, I am not sure that we could ever have reached our solution. " 

The doctor had taken the lamp and was narrowly scrutinizing the body. " 

"You did, Doctor, but none the less you must come round to my view, for 
otherwise I shall keep on piling fact upon fact on you until your reason breaks 
down under them and acknowledges me to be right. Chain mail, or an American 
football suit--that's what you'll want. Well, good-bye. " 

The Black Swan is an inn of repute in the High Street, at no distance from the 
station, and there we found the young lady waiting for us. "You may not be 
aware that I have royal blood in my veins. " 

I rushed down to the instrument. Holmes," said White Mason in great delight. 
"Why, whatever are you doing?" 

Holmes had stepped across, had lit the candle, and was passing it backward and 
forward across the window-panes. It is that big body of thine that I am after. 
It is evidently the theory of some arm-chair lounger who evolves all these neat 
little paradoxes in the seclusion of his own study. They were walking slowly 
along in deep conversation, and I saw her making quick little movements of her 
hands as if she were very earnest in what she was saying, while he listened 
intently, and once or twice shook his head in strong dissent. Milverton will 
send the letters to the Earl unless a large sum of money is paid him. He is 
known to have held papers which he used for blackmailing purposes. Douglas: on 
the contrary, he was the most fearless man he had ever known. He ordered the 
drawbridge to be pulled up every night because it was the ancient custom of the 
old house, and he liked to keep the old ways up. Let us descend, Lestrade. This 
it falls away towards Mapleton, and you can see from here that there is a long 
hollow over yonder, which must have been very wet on Monday night. " 

Lestrade shrugged his shoulders. " 

"You mean that he has a great income and that he must earn it in an illegal 
fashion?" 

"Exactly. "I declare to you, Challenger, that I never wish to hear of football 
or of buffaloes so long as I live. You understand, madam, that your husband 
will be arrested and tried for the death of the man who lies before us?  What 
you say may be used in evidence. Your hand stole towards your own old wound, 
and a smile quivered on your lips, which showed me that the ridiculous side of 
this method of settling international questions had forced itself upon your 
mind. But I daresay it may have come to your notice that, counterfoil of 
another man's message, there may be some disinclination on the part of the 
officials to oblige you. " 

"How do you deduce that?" 

"Because it ran up the curtain. " 

"He only, as I understand, gave an inarticulate cry?" 

"Yes. "I can make nothing of it," said he. "Now, Mr. I say it with all modesty, 
but it did. I've never breathed a word about it yet to mortal man. Report to me 
if anything fresh occurs, and rely upon my assistance if it should be needed. 

"There are certainly some points of interest in this case, Watson," he remarked 
when the landlady had left us. 

Its master had risen and was staring with flushed cheeks and shining eyes. 
"Very good, mate. It's myself that would be sorry if it were needful to give 
you a lesson. " 

He hardly opened his lips during that weary trudge across the moor, nor would 
he enter the school when he reached it, but went on to Mackleton Station, 
whence he could send some telegrams. "Besides, we may chance to hit upon some 
other obvious facts which may have been by no means obvious to Mr. Lestrade. 



"Hum!  The investigation really was a very simple one," remarked Holmes, "but I 
don't think it struck him in that light when he first called us in. Hudson has 
risen to the occasion," said Holmes, uncovering a dish of curried chicken. He 
shook hands with Holmes and introduced his comrade as Inspector Baynes, of the 
Surrey Constabulary. There are some trees, Watson, which grow to a certain 
height, and then suddenly develop some unsightly eccentricity. Neville St. 
Clair. As to Mrs. 

And there we were, the four of us, upon the dreamland, the lost world, of Maple 
White. 

"There was the case of Von Bischoff at Frankfort last year. Holmes," said he, 
smiling. 

"When you go to bed lock the door of this room on the outside and keep the key. 
As I came back to Professor Summerlee, he was having a furious altercation with 
the men who had carried down the oxygen, his little white goat's beard jerking 
with indignation. Holmes, my hair is somewhat luxuriant, and of a rather 
peculiar tint of chestnut. They were always very careful, I observed, to turn 
my face away from the window, so that I became consumed with the desire to see 
what was going on behind my back. The Indian treasure, the curious plan found 
among Morstan's baggage, the strange scene at Major Sholto's death, the 
rediscovery of the treasure immediately followed by the murder of the 
discoverer, the very singular accompaniments to the crime, the footsteps, the 
remarkable weapons, the words upon the card, corresponding with those upon 
Captain Morstan's chart,--here was indeed a labyrinth in which a man less 
singularly endowed than my fellow-lodger might well despair of ever finding the 
clue. These two, finding that through his ignorance of the language he was 
helpless in their hands, had kept him a prisoner, and had endeavored by cruelty 
and starvation to make him sign away his own and his sister's property. 

"Now for the events at Lachine between nine and ten on the evening of last 
Monday. 

It was useless, however. " 

"It would be shame to the good brothers of Beaulieu if I could not," he 
answered, "seeing that I have been their clerk this ten years back. 

"So much for Mr. If there was nothing else left to him, he could at least 
devote his life to revenge. I am convinced that he really believed in his heart 
that I came round to the Chestnuts three days a week for the pleasure of his 
company, and very especially to hear his views upon bimetallism, a subject upon 
which he was by way of being an authority. We are both prepared to swear that 
no one could have entered the room during the night. 

"But here also the ministers of justice were waiting. Since dawn Professor 
Challenger had been acutely uneasy, continually scanning each bank of the 
river. " 

"In short, that she had become suddenly deranged?" 

"Well, really, when I consider that she has turned her back--I will not say 
upon me, but upon so much that many have aspired to without success--I can 
hardly explain it in any other fashion. " 

Holmes said little more, but the picture of the old roysterer seemed to have a 
fascination for him, and his eyes were continually fixed upon it during supper. 

"The younger brother of the late Sir James Walter, the head of the Submarine 
Department. "Here, Lestrade, your brandy-bottle! Put her in the chair! She has 
fainted from ill-usage and exhaustion. The tailor's tab is on the neck--'Neal, 
Outfitter, Vermissa, U. The dancing Irish deviltry had gone from her lover's 
eyes. You may go to any expense which you think necessary. We hope very soon to 
return to Devonshire. Be ready, I pray ye, at early cock-crow. Play tricks with 
me, and I'll crush you. " 

"What do you wish me to do?" 

"To give me a true account of all that happened at the Abbey Grange last 
night--a TRUE account, mind you, with nothing added and nothing taken off. We 
used always to get what we wanted for ourselves. Not a word more could I draw 
from him until we were back at the trainer's house. The murder, however, was 
clearly made out, and it was certain that we must all have been concerned in 
it. 

As they approached the centre of the town the scene was brightened by a row of 
well-lit stores, and even more by a cluster of saloons and gaming houses, in 
which the miners spent their hard-earned but generous wages. "And yet I confess 
that I'd like to give them a complete case when they come. But before doing so 
I took a stroll in the curious old-world garden which flanked the house. "He'll 
be the boy for the clean job," said the oldsters to one another, and waited 
their time until they could set him to his work. 

McGinty had instruments enough already; but he recognized that this was a 
supremely able one. 

"A fairly complete record, Watson!  If we could only get at the man at the 
other end!"  He sat lost in thought, tapping his fingers on the table. His 
thin, thought-worn features and sunken, haggard cheeks bespoke one who had 
indeed beaten down that inner foe whom every man must face, but had none the 
less suffered sorely in the contest. " 

"Surely to any man it is a sad sight," said Alleyne, "to see these holy men, 
who have done no sin themselves, suffering so for the sins of others. And yet 
that would involve treachery towards the mistress to whom this woman seems 
devoted. Sir, we have been in the wars together, and I have seen many a brave 
following but never such a set of woodland boys as this. They do but want you 
at their head, and who will bar the way to them!" 

"Pardieu!" said Sir Nigel, "if they are all like their messenger, they are 
indeed men of whom a leader may be proud. They then play up to the idea by 
leaving this bicycle in the park as proof of the existence of some outsider. 
They know--and shall know--nothing of Whitehall Terrace. They are as jealous as 
a pair of professional beauties. At Greenwich we were about three hundred paces 
behind them. Filled with the most maddening doubts and fears, she rushed down 
the lane and, by rare good-fortune, met in Fresno Street a number of constables 
with an inspector, all on their way to their beat. The inspector and two men 
accompanied her back, and in spite of the continued resistance of the 
proprietor, they made their way to the room in which Mr. That can only mean 
that the rider is throwing his weight on to the handle-bar, as a man does when 
he is sprinting. Ah! it was a bad day that ever he took a glass in his hand 
again. One moment, Mrs. In mercy I put a bullet through his skull, and he fell 
sprawling among the aloes. Finally, he examined with his glass the word upon 
the wall, going over every letter of it with the most minute exactness. 

"He has not been moved at all?" he asked. "And yet--and yet--well, we have some 
suggestive facts to act upon. I believe that a single lady can get on very 
nicely upon an income of about 60 pounds. ' 

"'On the contrary,' said I, 'I opened the door myself because I felt the room 
to be a little close. 'What then could have been in this letter to cause so 
dreadful a result?' 

"'Nothing. 

"'You don't know me?' he asked. He lay upon his back, his face upturned, with 
his white teeth grinning through his short, black beard. I was struggling and 
screaming when Gennaro entered and attacked him. Watson, but this case is 
certainly exceptional. 

"I thought so. 

"Quite so. No argument or persuasion could ever induce him to set up a female 
establishment after the manner of his companions. 131 was one of a row, all 
flat-chested, respectable, and most unromantic dwellings. As we drove up, we 
found the railings in front of the house lined by a curious crowd. Your duties, 
as far as the child is concerned, are very light. And now I must fly to my dear 
boy to apologise to him for the wrong which I have done him. Is it not pitiful? 
And here I find you, a man of sense, boggling about terms, when your client's 
future and honour are at stake. " 

"That, I think, is hardly probable," said Challenger, projecting his beard and 
sinking his eyelids. He was a very restless gentleman, sir, a-walkin' and 
a-stampin' all the time he was here. He could drink hard and show little trace 
of it; but that evening, had his mate Scanlan not been at hand to lead him 
home, the feted hero would surely have spent his night under the bar. He 
computes the value of the jewels at not less than half a million sterling. Sure 
enough, when we reached Baker Street the detective was already there, and we 
found him pacing up and down in a fever of impatience. " 

"But how of the lady?" asked Alleyne, with dry lips. 

"What's the car?" he asked. That smooth bark and those small, ribbed leaves 
seemed familiar to my eyes. When Mr. 

"The problem presents features of interest," said he. 

"That's the Union House," said the guide, pointing to one saloon which rose 
almost to the dignity of being a hotel. I observed that as he stepped out he 
gave a most searching glance to right and left, and at every subsequent street 
corner he took the utmost pains to assure that he was not followed. But, 
halloa! What is this?" 

It was a lady's hand-bag which stood upon the study table--a trim little 
handbag of crocodile-skin and silver. One was that these brutes could not run 
as fast as a man in the open. But our aid was of little avail and only involved 
us in the same peril. My soul cried out for revenge. I stayed for the most 
necessary to be near the scene of action. Rucastle, who was waiting outside. 

"'So,' said he, smiling, 'it was you, then. 

"'Well,' said I, 'you said you'd give me one for Christmas, and I was feeling 
which was the fattest. A flat velvet cap was drawn forward to keep the glare 
from his eyes, and he rode with lips compressed and anxious face, as one who 
has much care upon his mind. There was also a silver cigarette-case, with "J. 
They extended in an unbroken wall right across the background. Then, with the 
aid of the groom and the stable-boy, they had conveyed their injured mistress 
to her room. 

"What do you make of that, Watson?" Holmes whispered. "That's just his little 
peculiarity," he said. " 

"Well, you nearly had a worse one, for I believe they are not far off me. " 

"That, of course, explains it. 

"A very singular one. You must play your cards as best you can when such a 
stake is on the table. This dress does implicate Miss Flora Millar. I am a born 
sportsman. The answer was conclusive. " 

"One moment," Holmes interposed, "your statement is, I foresee, one of the most 
remarkable to which I have ever listened. " 

"Modesty and a humble mind," said she, "are the very first and rarest gifts in 
page or squire. " 

"But have sworn no vow of constancy or chastity?" 

"No, father. The "_Gloria Scott_" 



"I have some papers here," said my friend Sherlock Holmes, as we sat one 
winter's night on either side of the fire, "which I really think, Watson, that 
it would be worth your while to glance over. Egypt had gone through its 
delirium and was now comatose. Spain and Portugal, after a wild frenzy in which 
the Clericals and the Anarchists had fought most desperately, were now fallen 
silent. No cable messages were received any longer from South America. " 

"Were you on duty all day yesterday?" 

"Yes, sir. " 

To the astonishment of the knight, his words provoked a burst of merriment from 
the barons round, in which the two kings and the prince were fain to join. "I 
wish to have a quiet word with you, Bradstreet. My doctor says it is a question 
whether I shall live a month. I am a widower and have an only son, Arthur. My 
correspondence, however, is, as you know, a varied one, and I am somewhat upon 
my guard against any packages which reach me. Suddenly, however, he started, 
tapped me on the shoulder, and pointed over the meadows. An instant later it 
was hurriedly replaced, and I caught a glimpse of a dark, beautiful, horrified 
face glaring at the narrow opening of the box-room. It was evidently of great 
weight, and was slowly carried forward and placed in front of the Professor's 
chair. " 

There was a sudden rush and a scuffle, followed by the clash of iron and a cry 
of pain. Warren's rooms, the gloom of a London winter evening had thickened 
into one gray curtain, a dead monotone of colour, broken only by the sharp 
yellow squares of the windows and the blurred haloes of the gas-lamps. Standing 
as it does near the corner of the street,  it commands a view down Howe Street, 
with its more pretentious houses. 

"Your name is very familiar to me, Mr. On the way he passed the fishing village 
of Pitt's Deep, and marked that a little creyer or brig was tacking off the 
land, as though about to anchor there. Behind them might still be seen the 
broad estuary of the Gironde, with the high towers of Saint Andre and Saint 
Remi shooting up from the plain. After them came twenty-seven sumpter horses 
carrying tent-poles, cloth, spare arms, spurs, wedges, cooking kettles, 
horse-shoes, bags of nails and the hundred other things which experience had 
shown to be needful in a harried and hostile country. In the cab, however, she 
first turned faint, and then burst into a passion of weeping,--so sorely had 
she been tried by the adventures of the night. " 

MacDonald smiled feebly, and looked appealingly to me. Culverton Smith. Through 
the half-open door I heard a high, petulant, penetrating voice. The prince's 
court, too, with its swarm of noble barons and wealthy knights, many of whom, 
in imitation of their master, had brought their ladies and their children from 
England, all helped to swell the coffers of the burghers. It seemed to us to be 
a postscript at the end of the letter and it said: 'Please, please, as you are 
a gentleman, burn this letter, and be at the gate by ten o clock. I am not a 
rich man, but if there is any danger threatening my little woman, I would spend 
my last copper to shield her. It was a fine, thick piece of wood, 
bulbous-headed, of the sort which is known as a "Penang lawyer. This, of 
course, fitted in well enough with the police theory, if the Colonel could have 
seen his wife making a murderous attack upon him. Where does the window of that 
look out to?" He stepped across the bedroom, pushed open the door, and glanced 
round the other chamber. ' The whole train of thought did not occupy a second. 

"'What business have you here?' asked the lad. 

"Miss Sarah Cushing is extremely ill," said he. 

We had gathered in a little group at the bottom of the chasm, some forty feet 
beneath the mouth of the cave, when a huge rock rolled suddenly downwards--and 
shot past us with tremendous force. You would need wings ere you could reach 
Sir Nigel's side. Among other things I bought these brown boots--gave six 
dollars for them--and had one stolen before ever I had them on my feet. There 
were four feet unaccounted for. Mark well the man with the high nose and flaxen 
beard who hath placed his hand upon the shoulder of the dark hard-faced 
cavalier in the rust-stained jupon. " 

"Aye, by St. I was then much surprised and interested on glancing down to 
observe that, though the boots which she was wearing were not unlike each 
other, they were really odd ones; the one having a slightly decorated toe-cap, 
and the other a plain one. " 

"I heard it distinctly, and I am sure that it was really the sob of a woman. " 

"Yet what assurance have we," said the prince, "that this is not some varlet 
masquerading in his master's harness, or some caitiff knight, the very touch of 
whose lance might bring infamy upon an honorable gentleman?" 

"It is not so, sire," cried the squire earnestly. "Here it is, and with your 
permission I will read it to you. Suddenly, however, a flash of intelligence 
had come over his sodden features, and he rose and staggered for the door. One 
month India lay as still and peaceful, to all appearance, as Surrey or Kent; 
the next there were two hundred thousand black devils let loose, and the 
country was a perfect hell. It may possibly recur to your memory that when I 
examined the paper upon which the printed words were fastened I made a close 
inspection for the water-mark. One's first impression is that they are entirely 
soft. Then one comes suddenly upon something very hard, and you know that you 
have reached the limit and must adapt yourself to the fact. 

"I was curious, in the first place, to see how far the family ear had been 
reproduced in her. " 

I thought he was joking, for the view was sordid enough, but he soon explained 
himself. They were outwardly respectable citizens, well clad and cleanly; but a 
judge of faces would have read little hope for Birdy Edwards in those hard 
mouths and remorseless eyes. I told them that he was gone to Europe and that I 
did not know where to find him. " 

"Exactly. 

He held out his hand, and I saw in the light of the lamp that two of his 
knuckles were burst and bleeding. "He was the only friend I made during the two 
years I was at college. " 

There was a long silence, during which Holmes leaned his chin upon his hands 
and stared into the crackling fire. "Methinks this hath become a family custom 
amongst the Edricsons. " 

"So they all strive to do. Ah, here he is!" 

"Good-morning, Holmes," said the baronet. "You look like a general who is 
planning a battle with his chief of the staff. But it were shame if this went 
further. " 

"What effect do you think it will have upon his plans now that he knows you are 
here?" 

"It may cause him to be more cautious, or it may drive him to desperate 
measures at once. "I am a great sufferer, and I have long had suspicions as to 
that valve. 

"An acquaintance isn't always a friend," said the police captain, grinning. 
Once again we were able to visit our camp and get at our stores. Gradually the 
leaves thinned around me, and I was aware, from the wind upon my face, that I 
had topped all the trees of the forest. I was determined, however, not to look 
about me before I had reached the very highest point, so I scrambled on until I 
had got so far that the topmost branch was bending beneath my weight. It is a 
blessed night this when I am once more in safety,--I and my poor possessions. 
At his command she consented to pass as his sister, though he found the limits 
of his power over her when he endeavoured to make her the direct accessory to 
murder. I glanced my eyes over it, and then settled down to my task of copying. 

It seems, however, that there must have been some short cut for those who knew 
it, for before I had reached the road I was astounded to see Miss Stapleton 
sitting upon a rock by the side of the track. 

"What makes you think such a thing?" 

"Because Inspector Martin from Norwich has just passed through. " 

"Yes, but there is another empty house farther up the street which he must have 
passed before he came to this one. 

"In sooth and in sooth!" cried the king-at-arms with scornful eyes. "I think 
you must agree, Watson, that it is not a case in which we are called upon to 
interfere. Glad and proud shall I be to have you with me. " 

"Thank you. Sit at this desk and write to my dictation. Direct the envelope to 
the address given. That is right. At last after so many years they were broken 
and scattered. These cliffs, I may remark, are basaltic, and therefore 
plutonic. But soon, by the merciful provision of nature, the over-excited nerve 
ceased to respond. Holmes, is how on earth YOU got yourself mixed up in the 
matter. Mrs. Warren, you say that the man was of middle size, dark, and 
bearded. " 

At half-past twelve we found ourselves upon the steps of Mrs. 

"The matter grows in interest," said he. "Sir James died this morning. " 

"True, true, camarade! Adieu, ma cherie! mon coeur est toujours a toi. Sherlock 
Holmes can return to London by the morning train. This reticence upon his part 
had increased the somewhat inhuman effect which he produced upon me, until 
sometimes I found myself regarding him as an isolated phenomenon, a brain 
without a heart, as deficient in human sympathy as he was pre-eminent in 
intelligence. On my enquiry as to whether a Mr. The big-horn--for so it is 
called--was acting, probably, as a guardian over a flock which were invisible 
to the hunter; but fortunately it was heading in the opposite direction, and 
had not perceived him. 

Of the riders one was young, graceful, and fair, clad in plain doublet and 
hosen of blue Brussels cloth, which served to show his active and well-knit 
figure. "What are you after, anyhow?" 

Holmes took a swift glance round, and then pounced upon a sodden bundle tied 
together with cord which lay where it had been thrust under the writing table. 
The hundred waiting miners stood as motionless and helpless as if they were 
paralyzed. Power had changed hands. The protector had become the protected, and 
the whole fabric of the feudal system was tottering to a fall. In over a 
thousand cases I am not aware that I have ever used my powers upon the wrong 
side. That was not literally true. 1. Objection No. 2: We will suppose that he 
reaches London and sees the foreign agent. He must bring back the papers before 
morning or the loss will be discovered. When he picked himself up he found he 
was on Hampstead Heath; so he took a bus home, and there he lies now on his 
sofa, while I came straight round to tell you what had happened. I shook him by 
the arm, 'It's time to get out,' I said. " 

"Was the door open?" 

"Yes, it was open. If we have no other way of catching him, we can always bait 
our line with the ring. It's heads I win and tails you lose. I should be very 
glad of a little assistance. " 

Holmes rubbed his hands, and his eyes glistened. 

"There are many things which might be done," said the forester thoughtfully. 
"Watson, I think you know Mr. Mr. Lestrade, of Scotland Yard, is acting already 
in the matter, but he assures me that he sees no objection to your 
co-operation, and that he even thinks that it might be of some assistance. " 

"So much for the Daily Chronicle," said Holmes as I finished reading. " 

"I have no sympathy with these childish games. "Who is without them? Your going 
forth is a grief to us as well as to yourself. "We are not out after you, but 
after this man McMurdo. " 

Summerlee was wiping the blood from a cut in his forehead, while I was tying up 
a nasty stab in the muscle of the neck. Now, would you have the kindness to go 
into your room and bar your shutters?" 

Miss Stoner did so, and Holmes, after a careful examination through the open 
window, endeavoured in every way to force the shutter open, but without 
success. " 

"Well, I'm glad to hear you say so," said Sir Henry, glancing with some 
surprise at my friend. Sit at this desk and write to my dictation. The violent 
and causeless excitement, followed by this brutality of speech, so far removed 
from his usual suavity, showed me how deep was the disorganization of his mind. 
An instant later the mystery was explained. Look at it through my lens. 

"But what do you make of this?" cried Professor Summerlee, triumphantly, 
pointing to what looked like the huge print of a five-fingered human hand 
appearing among the three-toed marks. 

The boy's chamber was carefully examined, and yielded nothing save the absolute 
conviction that it was only through the window that he could have escaped. " 

"Just a suggestion, perhaps. We stood at the entrance while Holmes made an 
examination of the carpet. The fellow must be somewhere. The numerous gas-lamps 
served only to show more clearly a long line of wooden houses, each with its 
veranda facing the street, unkempt and dirty. 

Over the wall of the yard we looked down upon the winding road, which led to 
the station. I am at a loss to know now why you did not advertise. 

"It is, of course, well known to you that in a successful banking business as 
much depends upon our being able to find remunerative investments for our funds 
as upon our increasing our connection and the number of our depositors. The 
Singular Experience of Mr. 

"Before this avenger got away, Barker and the wife had reached the room. I owe 
you many apologies, my dear Watson, but it was all-important that it should be 
thought I was dead, and it is quite certain that you would not have written so 
convincing an account of my unhappy end had you not yourself thought that it 
was true. " 

"I have heard you say that it is difficult for a man to have any object in 
daily use without leaving the impress of his individuality upon it in such a 
way that a trained observer might read it. He may have had no part in it. 

"Young friend," said he, when Alleyne was abreast of him, "I fear from thy garb 
that thou canst know little of the Abbey of Beaulieu. A thick mist lay over 
them, and from the heart of it there came the sudden scream of a steam whistle. 
It is from that salutory but terrible ordeal that we have just emerged, with 
minds which are still stunned by the suddenness of the blow and with spirits 
which are chastened by the realization of our own limitations and impotence. 
Sometimes Holmes would hurry on, sometimes stop dead, and once he made quite a 
little detour into the meadow. As to the housekeeper, she had heard nothing on 
the night of the crime. " 

Ere Alleyne could answer there swung round the curve of the road a lady's 
carriage drawn by three horses abreast with a postilion upon the outer one. " 

"And what marks did you see by the wicket-gate?" 

"None in particular. 

"I shall glance into the case for you," said Holmes, rising, "and I have no 
doubt that we shall reach some definite result. I have already explained that 
the testimony of the postmaster shows that the test was worthless and that we 
have no proof one way or the other. Two Sikh troopers were placed under my 
command, and I was instructed if anything went wrong to fire my musket, when I 
might rely upon help coming at once from the central guard. It's a bad place, 
the great Grimpen Mire. Holmes. " 

The Colonel waved his hand towards my friend, and the Inspector bowed. " 

"Nay, gentles, gentles!" cried Dame Eliza, in a singsong heedless voice, which 
showed that such bickerings were nightly things among her guests. 

If Lord John's behavior at this time was strange, that of Challenger was more 
so. But I forget that you are yourself one of them. As I turned to speak to her 
the brute broke loose and fluttered off among the others. At Para they knew 
nothing. 

"My father hath gone down," she cried. " 

"I'd start this next minute if I knew where we could find him," said McMurdo. 
High above the roar of the wind and the clash of the sea rose the shrill 
half-human cries of the horses, as they found the water rising rapidly around 
them. Surely it could only be the opening of a cave. " 

"Any delay in arresting the assassin," I observed, "might give him time to 
perpetrate some fresh atrocity. "These strange men are our friends. You must 
remember that they were six years looking for it. I should recommend you also 
to send a note by the cabman to your wife to say that you have thrown in your 
lot with me. I sent John, the coachman, to watch you, ran up stairs, got into 
my walking-clothes, as I call them, and came down just as you departed. People 
tell me that I have spoiled him. Very likely I have. " 

"Now, Watson, make an effort, throw your mind back. For two hours, with most 
intense concentration, Holmes examined every object in turn, but his face 
showed that his quest was not a successful one. The setting sun shone full upon 
the passage floor, and I could see that the old, foot-worn gray stones with 
which it was paved were firmly cemented together, and had certainly not been 
moved for many a long year. After this I went to see Melville, at whose house I 
had first met Garcia, but I found that he really knew rather less about him 
than I did. Then your eyes fixed themselves upon your newly framed picture of 
General Gordon, and I saw by the alteration in your face that a train of 
thought had been started. " 

"Whom do you suspect?" 

"Oh, I would not venture to say, sir. Unemployed. Formerly 1st Bangalore 
Pioneers. Born London, 1840. ' He's forty-one years of age, which is mature for 
marriage. 

"'You seem to have made a vast impression upon my brother Arthur,' said he; 
'and I know that he is a pretty shrewd judge. In my aching head the one thought 
was throbbing that there really was truth in this man's story, that it was of 
tremendous consequence, and that it would work up into inconceivable copy for 
the Gazette when I could obtain permission to use it. 

It was he--and yet it was not he. "So Reuben Hayes is taken? I am right glad to 
hear it, if it will not react upon the fate of James. That will give you some 
idea of the size of the creature. He never returned. 

"I'm sorry, Mr. Thaddeus Sholto that I am anxious," she said. Then I shall 
study the great Jones's methods and listen to his not too delicate sarcasms. As 
I passed his pew on the way out I dropped my bouquet over to him, and he 
slipped the note into my hand when he returned me the flowers. I observed that 
books were piled on the floor at all other points, but that one bookcase was 
left clear. A crowd of morbid sightseers were still gathered round Deep Dene 
House, which was just such a suburban villa as I had pictured. 

"Very interesting--very interesting, indeed!" said Holmes, peering at this 
sinister relic. 

"No, no, my girl, the matter must be probed to the bottom. " 

"It recalls nothing to my mind. "Why not?" 

"Because I always keep faith. " 

"Then the truth is too bad to tell?" 

"You can put it that way if you like. " 

"And I to find an enemy. Where were you when you began to feel bad?" 

"Where was I, sir? Why, here, near the door. "Here is the address--Jacob 
Shafter, Sheridan Street. Listen to this, Mr. 

It has been said there is nothing appertaining to life upon the broad plain. 
"Has he escaped?" 

"He cannot escape us, madam. " 

"Didn't you ask him in?" 

"Yes, sir; he came in. " 

"How could I help suspecting him, when I actually saw him with the coronet in 
his hand?" 

"Oh, but he had only picked it up to look at it. " 

"Exactly. " 

"Then you may be so with me. With these two implements he trotted noiselessly 
about the room, sometimes stopping, occasionally kneeling, and once lying flat 
upon his face. It looks untidy, does it not, sir?" 

I moved my head to look at the cabinet behind me. Such was the news which, in 
scattered, distracted messages, the telephone had brought us. I was measuring 
how tall a man would need to be in order to see, as he passed, what papers were 
on the central table. He would probably consider that to send back the launch 
or to keep it at a wharf would make pursuit easy if the police did happen to 
get on his track. It is absurd, impossible, preposterous to anyone who knew 
him. 'Twere as easy to woo the snow-dame that we shaped last winter in our 
castle yard. I did but ask her yesternight for her green veil, that I might 
bear it as a token or lambrequin upon my helm; but she flashed out at me that 
she kept it for a better man, and then all in a breath asked pardon for that 
she had spoke so rudely. It is possible that I may be in a position then to 
indicate some course of action. 

"Do you see any prospect of solving this mystery, Mr. Holmes, all that actually 
occurred, for you already know so much that it is clearly to my interest that 
you should know all. If you have anything to say, you will find me writing my 
report in the sitting-room. " 

I placed my revolver, cocked, upon the top of the wooden case behind which I 
crouched. The bottle was full of it, and it is inconceivable that the first two 
glasses were clear and the third heavily charged with it. 

"This was the first point gained. "But he'll be gone before you can get him to 
hospital. " 

"He's a brave fellow," said a woman. "Thirty times have I journeyed it, forward 
and backward, and, by the twang of string! I am wont to come back this way more 
laden than I went. I have carried all that I had into France in a wallet, and 
it hath taken four sumpter-mules to carry it back again. " 

"Yes, I am better. I'll tell you what we did as we walk. Then you hand over to 
me three quarters of what you earn, and you keep the other quarter for 
yourself. No sound came from within, and at the silence Holmes' face clouded 
over. I have no doubt that he has twenty banking accounts; the bulk of his 
fortune abroad in the Deutsche Bank or the Credit Lyonnais as likely as not. If 
you can enjoy it in peace, well and good! If you find you cannot, take my 
advice, my boy, and leave it to your deadliest enemy. " 

We had the carriage to ourselves save for an immense litter of papers which 
Holmes had brought with him. " 

Holmes laughed. " 

"You suspect some one?" 

"I suspect myself. 

"Not only that, but the signature is typewritten. 

"Nothing of the sort," said the Professor, severely. The bed was in the centre 
of the room, and in it, propped up with pillows, was the owner of the house. 
Twice ere they reached open ground they had to break their way through small 
bodies of horses, and once there came a whistle of arrows and singing of stones 
about their ears; but, still dashing onwards, they shot out from among the 
tents and found their own comrades retreating for the mountains at no very 
great distance from them. Another five minutes of wild galloping over the 
plain, and they were all back in their gorge, while their pursuers fell back 
before the rolling of drums and blare of trumpets, which seemed to proclaim 
that the whole army of the prince was about to emerge from the mountain passes. 
Two others, flying together, tore a great gap in the St. Alleyne bore his share 
and his ale-mug away with him to a retired trestle in the corner, where he 
could sup in peace and watch the strange scene, which was so different to those 
silent and well-ordered meals to which he was accustomed. 

The one who led was a man between fifty and sixty years of age, war-worn and 
weather-beaten, with a broad, thoughtful forehead and eyes which shone brightly 
from under his fierce and overhung brows. He rose from the sofa and greeted us 
without difficulty when we entered. In a tingle of fear I was already running 
down the village street, and making for the path which I had so lately 
descended. If my expedition had no other results it would still have been 
noteworthy, but a curious incident occurred to me while there which opened up 
an entirely fresh line of inquiry. But they are men who will make a clean job 
when they are about it. " 

"You are under the charge of Mr. "The odds are that this plateau is of no great 
size, and we shall travel round it until we either find an easy way up it, or 
come back to the point from which we started. Why have you dragged me back?" 

"Because I wish that we make the passage together. " 

"But why?  What can it matter to him that his landlady should have a word of 
his writing?  Still, it may be as you say. I will tell you, however. He fired 
and missed me. 

"I did not take long to think about it, Watson. This is for your private eye. 
So far it holds together. 

In spite of the danger from dinosaurs (which is not great save at night, for, 
as I may have said before, they are mostly nocturnal in their habits) I have 
twice in the last three weeks been over to our old camp in order to see our 
negro who still kept watch and ward below the cliff. "Here is a hole in the 
side two ells across, the sail split through the centre, and the wood as bare 
as a friar's poll. A name derived from the fanciful resemblance to the sound 
produced by cocking a rifle. The soldiers came upon him in the garden. Above, 
the stars were shining brightly, and below, the lights of the shipping 
glimmered in the bay. Above them lay the Englishmen in their lines, even as 
they had stood, and higher yet upon the plateau a wild medley of the dead of 
all nations, where the last deadly grapple had left them. Kneel down, my child, 
and take an old man's blessing. " 

Alleyne Edricson bent his head while the Abbot poured out his heartfelt 
supplication that Heaven would watch over this young soul, now going forth into 
the darkness and danger of the world. Twice he struck at the chamber door 
without any reply from within. There has been no result. There are the folk 
enjoying themselves upon the golf-links and the laborers yonder cutting the 
corn. 

"My way ran down a dried-up watercourse, which we hoped would screen me from 
the enemy's sentries; but as I crept round the corner of it I walked right into 
six of them, who were crouching down in the dark waiting for me. "Now Vincent 
Square. " 

Morris drank, and his white face took a tinge of colour. " 

"Most certainly. 

"If you live here long you vill get your proof. 

"'Impossible!' I cried. "We thought that we should like to hear it all from 
your own lips," he said. Holmes! What is the matter?" 

My poor friend's face had suddenly assumed the most dreadful expression. " 

"And since?" 

"There was this dreadful man, Woodley, if you can call him an admirer. He read 
the thought upon my features, and his smile had a tinge of bitterness. The 
Indian looked up at him, and then, with a little yelp, cringed to the ground 
and clung to Lord John's leg. The manager clapped his two hands to the wound 
and doubled himself up. 

"They keep their distance from us," said he. Jonas Oldacre. C. , seated serene 
and impregnable behind all mere molecular disturbance. His card, which seemed 
too small to carry the weight of his academic distinctions, preceded him by a 
few seconds, and then he entered himself--so large, so pompous, and so 
dignified that he was the very embodiment of self-possession and solidity. 
There is only one punishment in his code. When we reached Scotland Yard she was 
handed over at once to the female searcher. He has nerve and he has knowledge. 
In the character of a registration-agent I had a most interesting gossip with 
his landlady. In ten more we were seated in the parlour of the inn and being 
treated to a rapid sketch of those events which have been outlined in the 
previous chapter. This is particularly so in the region between Holdernesse 
Hall and the school. We must have a look at it. We turn to the country on the 
north. This would explain it. Full of the one idea, I set myself to find out 
what had become of the Secretary. The latter, however, received his salutations 
coldly, and followed him with a stern face into the sitting-room. The first two 
that he tried were not successes, but the third, Mr. In that gloomy tunnel it 
must indeed have been a dreadful sight to see that huge black creature, with 
its flaming jaws and blazing eyes, bounding after its victim. 

McMurdo had been warned that some ordeal lay before him; but no one would tell 
him in what it consisted. Item, that after sundry japes and jokes the said 
brother John did lift up the said Mary Sowley and did take, carry, and convey 
her across a stream, to the infinite relish of the devil and the exceeding 
detriment of his own soul, which scandalous and wilful falling away was 
witnessed by three members of our order. " 

There was a buzz and murmur among the white-frocked brethren at this grave 
charge; but the Abbot held up his long quivering hand. " 

"It may turn out to be of more interest than you think. " 

Lestrade shook his head, though it seemed to me that his manner was less 
absolutely assured than before. "I call her to mind now. I have already looked 
into the matter, and have come, as I think, within sight of my solution. I 
reflected as I walked that few men in the world could have spent a stranger 
night or added more to human knowledge in the course of it. " 

"You can trust us to look after that, Mr. "All right, Watson, I don't intend to 
meddle. " 

"It shall be duly paid him. "I really fancy that you are not far from the 
truth. But I thought I'd stretch a point and drop down to see you in your own 
house. It is all full of great deserted halls, and winding passages, and long 
corridors twisting in and out, so that it is easy enough for folk to get lost 
in it. Some people without possessing genius have a remarkable power of 
stimulating it. Here it is that this creature takes his daily seat, 
cross-legged with his tiny stock of matches on his lap, and as he is a piteous 
spectacle a small rain of charity descends into the greasy leather cap which 
lies upon the pavement beside him. I found it in the Japanese cabinet, as he 
told the doctor. My friend volunteered to go and see. It is the first quality 
of a criminal investigator that he should see through a disguise. " 

"You found something compromising?" 

"Absolutely nothing. " 

"When you combine the ideas of whistles at night, the presence of a band of 
gipsies who are on intimate terms with this old doctor, the fact that we have 
every reason to believe that the doctor has an interest in preventing his 
stepdaughter's marriage, the dying allusion to a band, and, finally, the fact 
that Miss Helen Stoner heard a metallic clang, which might have been caused by 
one of those metal bars that secured the shutters falling back into its place, 
I think that there is good ground to think that the mystery may be cleared 
along those lines. Windibank, your stepfather, returned to France?" 

"Mr. ' There are fourteen other characteristics, but those are the more 
obvious. The night, however, was extremely dark and stormy, so that, in spite 
of the help of several passers-by, it was quite impossible to effect a rescue. 
An open telegram lay upon the table. The thick, warm air of the conservatory 
and the rich, choking fragrance of exotic plants took us by the throat. What a 
lovely thing a rose is!" 

He walked past the couch to the open window, and held up the drooping stalk of 
a moss-rose, looking down at the dainty blend of crimson and green. 

"Personally, I am unable to classify the creature with any certainty," said 
Summerlee, lighting his pipe from the fire. 

"Will you answer a question?" I asked. " 

"Dear me! Why, I could have sworn to it. "Oh, sir," he cried, "can you tell me 
where it went to?" 

"It came here. You have not mentioned to any of the three gentlemen whom you 
attend that anything is amiss?" 

"No, sir--not a word. " 

"Sure, we are all in it together," said Scanlan, McMurdo's mate, as the four 
sat together at supper. "I thought I'd dodge your British law; for I was not 
sure how I stood under it, and also I saw my chance to throw these hounds once 
for all off my track. " 

"Small!" shrieked the other. At Sir Nigel's words he started violently, and his 
swarthy features blanched to a livid gray. I have been trying some experiments 
after you left us this afternoon, and I find that no noise which MacDonald can 
make in the study can penetrate to me in the pantry when the doors are all 
shut. That is the advantage of being unofficial. 

"And now I have a very strange experience to tell you. 

"No doubt, sir," Summerlee answered. Her face was large and square and red, 
with fierce, thick brows, and the eyes of one who was accustomed to rule. She 
has been married three years, and believes that her position is quite secure, 
having shown her husband the death certificate of some man whose name she has 
assumed, when suddenly her whereabouts is discovered by her first husband; or, 
we may suppose, by some unscrupulous woman who has attached herself to the 
invalid. ' 

"'How long ago was it?' 

"'Oh, not very many minutes. 'I have thought it all out to the last detail. ' 

"'You have been very kind,' said he, 'but I must have this money, or else I can 
never show my face inside the club again. " 

"I see. At last she spoke in a hard and measured voice, as one who dare not 
trust herself to speak too freely. It was that vision which gave me an instant 
of sanity and of strength. " 

"You have the photograph?" 

"I know where it is. "Oh, George, I am so frightened. How cruelly I have 
misjudged him!" 

"When I arrived at the house," continued Holmes, "I at once went very carefully 
round it to observe if there were any traces in the snow which might help me. 
He had, he said, but gone for a while that I might be the freer for my 
devotions. 

"'Well,' said I, 'the gentleman at No. Along this a party of the ape-men were 
passing. At the opening of one of these something white was shimmering, but I 
was unable to make out what it was. 

And now I turn to the last supreme eventful moment of our adventure. The one 
was a man with yellow flowing beard and very long hair of the same tint 
drooping over his shoulders; his dress of good Norwich cloth and his assured 
bearing marked him as a man of position, while the sombre hue of his clothes 
and the absence of all ornament contrasted with the flash and glitter which had 
marked the king's retinue. 

The rescuing party were speedily able to convince the two castaways that their 
appearance was no delusion. "It was in the north country. " 

"Oh, come, we must play the game accordin' to rules," said Lord John. " 

"In the centre?" 

"Yes, about it. "I should not have the impertinence to do it again after what 
you say. It appears that I am wrong--look at this!" He threw me over the note 
which the commissionaire had brought. 

Holmes turned the body over reverently, and examined it with great attention. 

I could see as he looked down that he was repressing some internal emotion. 

"In refusing to commit yourself you are but showing a proper scientific 
reserve," said Challenger, with massive condescension. Holmes. M. ' Now my 
theory all along has been that Lady St. Everything which had been disconnected 
before began at once to assume its true place, and I had a shadowy presentiment 
of the whole sequence of events. He followed the man, reached the window, saw 
the abstraction of the documents, and pursued the thief. These walls are thick, 
and it is conceivable that his shriek, if he had time to utter one, was 
unheard. Some account of them and of their appearance was in the papers, and 
would naturally occur to anyone who wished to invent a story in which imaginary 
robbers should play a part. But there are curious and suggestive details about 
the case, Watson. Ainstree, the greatest living authority upon tropical 
disease, is now in London. All remonstrance is useless, Holmes, I am going this 
instant to fetch him. Right across the foot of the hill there had sprung up a 
long wall of struggling horses and stricken men, which ever grew and heightened 
as fresh squadrons poured on the attack. 

"'That was there when your ritual was drawn up,' said I, as we drove past it. 
She held her ground firmly. 

"Last Monday I had finished for the day and was dressing in my room above the 
opium den when I looked out of my window and saw, to my horror and 
astonishment, that my wife was standing in the street, with her eyes fixed full 
upon me. It is very well in time of peace to lead such a life as we have had 
together, but now the war-banner is in the wind once more, and, by these ten 
finger-bones! if he go alone, old Samkin Aylward will walk beside it. " 

"That is just the point which I want to come to, Mrs. " 

"Then you are guilty. Thaddeus," said the porter, inexorably. "Folk may be 
friends o' yours, and yet no friends o' the master's. He pays me well to do my 
duty, and my duty I'll do. A couple of small plane trees stood in the corner of 
the yard, and underneath them lay several pathetic little balls of fluffy 
feathers, with tiny feet uplifted. The coyote skulks among the scrub, the 
buzzard flaps heavily through the air, and the clumsy grizzly bear lumbers 
through the dark ravines, and picks up such sustenance as it can amongst the 
rocks. He was a man of such gigantic strength that, even with the handcuffs 
which Holmes had so deftly fastened upon his wrists, he would have very quickly 
overpowered my friend had Hopkins and I not rushed to his rescue. " 

"I am delighted to see you," said she, pressing my hand warmly. Fowler. As to 
Miss Violet Hunter, my friend Holmes, rather to my disappointment, manifested 
no further interest in her when once she had ceased to be the centre of one of 
his problems, and she is now the head of a private school at Walsall, where I 
believe that she has met with considerable success. On the deal boards of the 
carpetless floor there was outlined a fresh track of blood. On the other hand a 
wild chaos of boulders and debris made all advance impossible. As we ran 
towards it the vague outline hardened into a definite shape. I saw him stoop 
and strain until with a sharp crash it flew open. Here are the papers, you see. 
The crowd roared with delight as Sir Nigel would stoop his head to avoid a 
blow, or by some slight movement of his body allow some terrible thrust to 
glance harmlessly past him. What then is left?" 

"An almanac!" 

"Excellent, Watson! I am very much mistaken if you have not touched the spot. 
You must lock yourself up from him to-night. I will keep your confession, and 
if McCarthy is condemned I shall be forced to use it. " 

"All right," said Holmes quietly. I am not hysterical, nor given to fainting. 
There were some fine archers who drew their last shaft that day. Upon this 
slope were assembled a great number of school children, all kneeling at prayer. 
On it was printed, in bold straggling letters:-- 

"Twenty-nine days are given you for amendment, and then----" 

The dash was more fear-inspiring than any threat could have been. I have no 
doubt that the house might have been purchased at the price which Holmes paid 
for his rooms during the years that I was with him. 

"'Listen to me, Sahib,' said the taller and fiercer of the pair, the one whom 
they called Abdullah Khan. An inspection of his chair showed me that he had 
been in the habit of standing on it, which of course would be necessary in 
order that he should reach the ventilator. The whole incident left a most ugly 
impression upon my mind, and I was not sorry next day to leave Donnithorpe 
behind me, for I felt that my presence must be a source of embarrassment to my 
friend. The conduct of the criminal investigation has been left in the 
experienced hands of Inspector Lestrade, of Scotland Yard, who is following up 
the clues with his accustomed energy and sagacity. 

"The paper! Of course!" yelled Holmes, in a paroxysm of excitement. 

"Fear not, my fair damsel," said Sir Nigel, "but tell me if perchance a poor 
and most unworthy knight can in any wise be of service to you. It seemed 
altogether past belief that anyone could make such a will, or that they would 
pay such a sum for doing anything so simple as copying out the 'Encyclopaedia 
Britannica. Suddenly she stopped and gazed at us all with a questioning stare. 

"I suppose, Watson, we must look upon you as a man of letters," said he. "There 
was a Reuter just come in from Singapore to the effect that the sickness seemed 
to be universal in Sumatra and that the lighthouses had not been lit in 
consequence. L. is?" 

"No, sir. No more than you have. Red republicans--that's what I call 'em. Duke 
of Balmoral's Iris. Yellow and black stripes. Lord Singleford's Rasper. 

"I think you have had the escape of your life, young fellah my lad. "May the 
holy Benedict, patron of our house, be present this day and aid us in our 
findings! How many counts are there?" 

"Three, most holy father," the brother answered in a low and quavering voice. 
Barnicot's rooms were the exact duplicates of the one which was destroyed in 
Morse Hudson's shop?" 

"They were taken from the same mould. " 

"Such a fact must tell against the theory that the man who breaks them is 
influenced by any general hatred of Napoleon. " 

"But are you not afraid to leave the horse in his power now, since he has every 
interest in injuring it?" 

"My dear fellow, he will guard it as the apple of his eye. That, however, I 
shall determine by a very simple test if we have an answer to our 
advertisement. While there was a chance of recovering it I was ready to devote 
my life to the one object. A constable met us at the garden gate. , Ph. E. C. 
There's one man who is still your master. Look at this stranger hiding out 
yonder, and watching and waiting! What's he waiting for? What does it mean? It 
means no good to anyone of the name of Baskerville, and very glad I shall be to 
be quit of it all on the day that Sir Henry's new servants are ready to take 
over the Hall. Soames, and you have got your man. When I add that he possesses 
a large and very blunt knife, you have an additional aid. 

"The plot thickens," he said, as I entered; "I have just had an answer to my 
American telegram. What make you of this upon the outer side?" 

"It is fairly and clearly written," Alleyne answered, "and it signifies To Sir 
Nigel Loring, Knight Constable of Twynham Castle, by the hand of Christopher, 
the servant of God at the Priory of Christchurch. I was ruined, shamefully, 
hopelessly ruined. I engaged with old Smith, and was to give him a big sum if 
he got us safe to our ship. A long black shadow was trailing down the corridor. 
He happened to be a friend of our colonel's, who had taken an interest in me 
since the accident. Carruthers, who seemed much excited afterwards. Woodley. I 
would sooner have a savage wild animal loose about the place. It would be quite 
as deadly, and a good deal less noisy than firing across a handkerchief. Well, 
Elsie learned some of our ways, but she couldn't stand the business, and she 
had a bit of honest money of her own, so she gave us all the slip and got away 
to London. Woodley. 

"And now, Mr. His eyes flashed, however, and he shook his bony hand with a 
fierce wild gesture after the retreating figure. 

"I am so glad that you have come," said he, shaking our hands with effusion. 
Watson, could tell you that we are very busy at present. It is fortunate that 
you are old school-fellows, as you must have much to talk over. What chance 
have we now to overtake or even to trace it? It is beyond our reach. " 

"You are of such value to me," he cried, in a whirl of hot, passionate words, 
"that all else has become nought. " 

"But surely, Mr. I could distinctly see the isolated, tree-crowned pinnacle of 
rock which was detached from the crag. By my hilt! camarades, there is no drop 
of French blood in my body, and I am a true English bowman, Samkin Aylward by 
name; and I tell you, mes amis, that it warms my very heart-roots to set my 
feet on the dear old land once more. Yet, ere the last string had twanged, he 
would be down on his four bones among the stricken, and have them all houseled 
and shriven, as quick as shelling peas. There was no trace then of the horror 
which I had myself felt at this curt declaration; but his face showed rather 
the quiet and interested composure of the chemist who sees the crystals falling 
into position from his oversaturated solution. He was a clever man, was old 
Patrick. He insisted upon my climbing into his dog-cart, and he gave me a lift 
homeward. " 

"One horse?" interjected Holmes. Sidney Johnson, the senior clerk, met us at 
the office and received us with that respect which my companion's card always 
commanded. He is a man of forty, married, with five children. I dropped off 
after this and slept soundly all night. " 

This was an unexpected obstacle. It was evident to me that he had been very 
busy of late, for the notes which I had from Baker Street were few and short, 
with no comments upon the information which I had supplied and hardly any 
reference to my mission. A brown chest of drawers stood in one corner, a narrow 
white-counterpaned bed in another, and a dressing-table on the left-hand side 
of the window. What in the world can he have to do with it?  The case was 
featureless as I remember it. It lay between that and her bedroom, and I was 
determined to see which. 

"Holmes," I cried, "you are too late. We know who the author of the revolting 
business is, although one of the victims still escapes us. We believe there has 
been a change from a town hospital to a country practice. A cold sweat broke 
out over my body, and my heart turned sick at the misery of it. 

To Sherlock Holmes she is always THE woman. "You saw it first, and, by George, 
if you choose to put 'Lake Malone' on it, no one has a better right. " 

"I'll sit down, with your leave," the prisoner said, suiting the action to the 
word. " 

"You think so, too?" 

"I did not say a probable one. "You are an enthusiast in your line of thought, 
I perceive, sir, as I am in mine," said he. Keep silence, lest I call a curse 
upon you!" 

"Silence yourself!" roared the other. " 

"If it gets over the hedge we're done," said Summerlee, and his voice crackled 
into a nervous laugh as he spoke. Indeed, he smoked very little, and yet he 
might have kept some tobacco for his friends. It was the shrill out-cry of the 
landlady when she found her loss, and the clucking of the hens, which had 
streamed in through the open door, that first broke in upon the slumbers of the 
tired wayfarers. A more absurd object than she presented cocked up there with 
her face convulsed with anger, her feet dangling, and her body rigid for fear 
of an upset, I could not imagine. " 

"But why would you not let me near you, since there was in truth no infection?" 

"Can you ask, my dear Watson?  Do you imagine that I have no respect for your 
medical talents?  Could I fancy that your astute judgment would pass a dying 
man who, however weak, had no rise of pulse or temperature?  At four yards, I 
could deceive you. "Once already his life has been attempted, but some evil 
spirit shielded him. Once or twice in my career I feel that I have done more 
real harm by my discovery of the criminal than ever he had done by his crime. 
He had already, in spite of the rain, taken off his overcoat in order to do his 
delicate task, and so, as he fell, his knife gashed his thigh. A sudden thought 
struck him, however, and he ran through the hall door and round to the lawn 
upon which the long French windows open. What in the world can he have to do 
with it?  The case was featureless as I remember it. ' 

"'I am with you heart and soul,' said I. ' 

"'And what are they worth?' I asked. I simply want your opinion about a 
hydraulic stamping machine which has got out of gear. " 

"It is one of those cases where the art of the reasoner should be used rather 
for the sifting of details than for the acquiring of fresh evidence. "See, 
there is Bertrand himself, beside his banner, and there is King Henry, who 
rides to welcome him. "It is my business, and not yours. I go round at night to 
see that they are fastened. " 

"Canst carve too?" 

"I have carved two days a week for the brethren. And yet the chiel has shown us 
once before that he knows what he's talking about. 

The door of Briony Lodge was open, and an elderly woman stood upon the steps. 
The Spanish slinger, seeing the youth lie slain, and judging from his dress 
that he was no common man, rushed forward to plunder him, knowing well that the 
bowmen above him had expended their last shaft. Holmes paced with light, swift 
steps about the room; he sat in the various chairs, drawing them up and 
reconstructing their positions. He raised his head with a sudden jerk. I fell 
upon him, and as I held him my comrade blew a shrill call upon a whistle. Was 
it all to go for nothing? Why should I slink away without having carried out my 
commission, and without the payment which was my due? This woman might, for all 
I knew, be a monomaniac. "I had already considered that possibility. Her 
daughter was in the room, too--an uncommonly fine girl she is, too; she was 
looking red about the eyes and her lips trembled as I spoke to her. From her 
bedroom we descended to the sitting-room, where this strange tragedy had 
actually occurred. In the centre of this vast assemblage the lists seemed but a 
narrow strip of green marked out with banners and streamers, while a gleam of 
white with a flutter of pennons at either end showed where the marquees were 
pitched which served as the dressing-rooms of the combatants. 

"Your hat and boots, Watson, quick! Not a moment to lose!" He rushed into his 
room in his dressing-gown and was back again in a few seconds in a frock-coat. 
Sherlock Holmes here?" 

My friend bowed and smiled. " 







THE ADVENTURE OF THE NORWOOD BUILDER 



"From the point of view of the criminal expert," said Mr. "Trying to solve the 
problem as to whether it is possible to get comfortable rooms at a reasonable 
price. " 

"That's a strange thing," remarked my companion; "you are the second man to-day 
that has used that expression to me. This is not such a populous neighbourhood. 
As the whirl of dust drew nearer to the solitary bluff upon which the two 
castaways were reposing, the canvas-covered tilts of waggons and the figures of 
armed horsemen began to show up through the haze, and the apparition revealed 
itself as being a great caravan upon its journey for the West. Dear me, this is 
very interesting. And the cut--a positive tear, I see. "Not another word, Sir!  
You should have been at the office for evening duty half an hour ago; only I 
hadn't the heart to remind you. Some day, perhaps, when you have won your place 
in the world, we shall talk it over again. That delicately bronzed skin, almost 
oriental in its coloring, that raven hair, the large liquid eyes, the full but 
exquisite lips,--all the stigmata of passion were there. Bear that in mind. 
Now, Thomas, I pray you dispatch, for we have a long ride before us and sun has 
already set. " 

Alleyne gazed upon the scene--the portly velvet-clad official, the knot of 
hard-faced archers with their hands to the bridles of their horses, the thief 
with his arms trussed back and his doublet turned down upon his shoulders. It 
was at a quarter to twelve, as a matter of fact. " 

"We shall endeavour to clear up these points for you. Young West took the 
papers. Why, Watson, let us put their own devilish trade-mark upon them. " 

He had hardly spoken before there rushed into the room one of the most lovely 
young women that I have ever seen in my life. I should not have intruded it 
upon your attention had you not shown some incredulity the other day. I was on 
some sort of a heathy common mottled over with dark clumps of furze-bushes. " 

"I can't imagine. 

"You're right, Mr. It was then that we ascertained that Lord Saltire had not 
been alone in his flight. The sun shining slantwise through the trees threw 
delicate traceries across the road, with bars of golden light between. He went 
out again, therefore, through the window, and having obtained the help of a 
policeman and of a medical man, he returned. " 

"Colonel Ross did not impress me as a man who would be likely to show much 
mercy in any case. " 

As the words were said he felt two hard points in front of his eyes, pressing 
upon them so that it appeared as if he could not move forward without a danger 
of losing them. There was absolutely no clue of any kind. 

"The blind was not down in your room, and I could see Miss Harrison sitting 
there reading by the table. 

"I've got my facts pretty clear," said Stanley Hopkins. A. He had hardly got 
started with the work, however, when his quick ears caught the sounds of a 
distant car. " 

"And you think you have evidence that he murdered his late master?" 

"I didn't say so, Mr. He's in hiding, too, but he's not a convict as far as I 
can make out. 

He was indeed off, for after sniffing round again he suddenly made up his mind, 
and darted away with an energy and determination such as he had not yet shown. 

"Well, I won't see him, Staples. Once, through a break in the trees, we saw a 
clear shoulder of green hill some distance away, and across this a large 
dun-colored animal was traveling at a considerable pace. Then all was blank, 
until he woke to find kindly blue English eyes peering down upon him and to 
hear the blessed sound of his country's speech. " 

"Hum! We will talk about that. It is well to be prepared. 

My first impression as I opened the door was that a fire had broken out, for 
the room was so filled with smoke that the light of the lamp upon the table was 
blurred by it. Baynes?" 

"Highly honoured, sir, I am sure. " 

"You appear to have been very prompt and businesslike in all that you have 
done. I saw them throw his body across a horse and ride away with it, but I 
fear the life had gone from him. He seems to be a very respectable, learned, 
and talented sort of man. His whole life appears to be spent in an alternation 
between savage fits of passion and gloomy intervals of sulking. His ruddy hair 
was shot with grey, and the furrows upon his brow had been cut a little deeper 
by Time's chisel, but in all else he was the Lord John who had been our good 
comrade in the past. 

"What is it, Ford?" cried Alleyne, springing to his feet. You'll have the doing 
of it in your own hands. That's why I want to get over the water as soon as you 
do. But is it understandable that he should go out of his way to bring with him 
the most noisy weapon he could select, knowing well that it will fetch every 
human being in the house to the spot as quick as they can run, and that it is 
all odds that he will be seen before he can get across the moat? Is that 
credible, Mr. I know our man too well to suppose that he has left anything up 
here which may lead us to him. " 

"But you have seen a good deal of her since. It is but a bow-shot to the left, 
and, indeed, I can see the shadow of it. I say again that they are God's own 
saints, and I bow my head to them. " 

"So we are to be cheated out of the last hour of our lives," Summerlee remarked 
bitterly. "Well, this fairly beats me!" he cried at last. " 

"Yes, it's worth it," the other answered, "to those that are loyal and go 
through with it and are a help to the lodge. To my certain knowledge he has 
acted on behalf of three of the reigning houses of Europe in very vital 
matters. 

"You will tell him exactly how you have left me," said he. "There is another 
morass down yonder, and a narrow neck between. Come back, friend"--and so, by 
mingled pushing and entreaties, they got his head round for Christchurch once 
more. " 

We made our way downstairs as quietly as possible, and out into the bright 
morning sunshine. "I think, if you will have me, that I would rather go with 
you. My memory failed me, or I should have been able to foretell it. 

"Tell me," said he at last, "could you swear that this was a man's face which 
you saw at the window?" 

"Each time that I saw it I was some distance away from it, so that it is 
impossible for me to say. That, I remember, filled us with the strongest sense 
of intolerable injustice. While there was a chance of recovering it I was ready 
to devote my life to the one object. Even the most comprehensive mind"--here he 
closed his eyes and simpered--"could hardly conceive a universal outbreak of it 
in this fashion. 

As the sun rose slowly above the eastern horizon, the caps of the great 
mountains lit up one after the other, like lamps at a festival, until they were 
all ruddy and glowing. Holmes, have you proved us to be wrong yet? Have you 
found your tramp?" he cried. 

"When we were taking coffee in the drawing-room that night after dinner, I told 
Arthur and Mary my experience, and of the precious treasure which we had under 
our roof, suppressing only the name of my client. "Sir James died this morning. 
" 

"True, true, camarade! Adieu, ma cherie! mon coeur est toujours a toi. Jones 
and I resumed our cigars and our talk. I'll make it as short as I can. That 
will give me the chance of telling you how things are shaping. " 

"Did you not investigate?" 

"No; the matter passed as unimportant. His only remark was, "There's some new 
stuff, cuticura or something, which is better than arnica. 

"Ask what you like, Mr. At the same time, I was very much surprised when I 
heard you two gentlemen come back this morning and learned that you had been 
chasing Selden. 

"Now, Mr. If I could lie low for a while and then get away where I could be 
joined by my 'widow' we should have a chance at last of living in peace for the 
rest of our lives. In either case, my dear Mr. Now all pretense of grief had 
passed away from her. The light still burned steadily in front. 

"It was pitch dark inside the house, and the colonel fumbled about looking for 
matches and muttering under his breath. " 

"By Saint Paul!" quoth Sir Nigel, plucking the patch from his eye, "I think 
that I am now clear of my vow, for this Spanish knight was a person from whom 
much honor might be won. Harding's evidence, and I could see that he was 
thoroughly satisfied by the turn which affairs were taking. He made no remark, 
however, save that, unless we hurried, we should be late for our appointment 
with Lestrade. He gesticulated and almost danced with excitement in front of 
the lovers. So and so, of Ballarat. I was sitting in my den, which is at the 
back of the top of the house, about three o'clock, when I was convinced that I 
heard some sounds downstairs. " He included us all in a sweeping bow and 
stalked out of the room. " 

"Under the latter heading is included, no doubt, not only those who may have 
taken him away, but also those who conspire to keep him in his present 
position?" 

"Yes, yes," cried the Duke, impatiently. He was twenty-seven years of age, 
unmarried, and a clerk at Woolwich Arsenal. One of these was of weak mind, and 
we did not dare to trust him, and the other was suffering from jaundice, and 
could not be of any use to us. On either side the seamen whom Sir Nigel had 
chosen for the purpose had cast their anchors over the side of the galleys, so 
that the three vessels, locked in an iron grip, lurched heavily forward upon 
the swell. But on the fourth side--that which sloped down in the direction of 
the lake--there was only low scrub, with scattered trees and occasional open 
glades. A criminal strain ran in his blood, which, instead of being modified, 
was increased and rendered infinitely more dangerous by his extraordinary 
mental powers. Young as he was, and peaceful as was his dress, the dainty 
golden spurs which twinkled upon his heels proclaimed his knighthood, while a 
long seam upon his brow and a scar upon his temple gave a manly grace to his 
refined and delicate countenance. Lestrade went after his man, Stangerson, and 
it appears that he was wrong too. He got himself into a fog recently over a 
forgery case, and that was what brought him here. When we brought our launch 
alongside he was so firmly anchored that it was only by throwing the end of a 
rope over his shoulders that we were able to haul him out, and to drag him, 
like some evil fish, over our side. He opened the door himself, however, and 
greeted me with a great show of cordiality. He could drink hard and show little 
trace of it; but that evening, had his mate Scanlan not been at hand to lead 
him home, the feted hero would surely have spent his night under the bar. 

"I can take more than that," said he. I preserve, too, and in the pheasant 
months I usually have a house-party, so that it would not do to be 
short-handed. As we drove back I asked for the details. Stand with me here upon 
the terrace, for it may be the last quiet talk that we shall ever have. Move 
not the bow arm, and steady with the drawing hand!" 

"I' faith," said Black Simon, "I am a spearman myself, and am more fitted for 
hand-strokes than for such work as this. Yet I have spent my days among bowmen, 
and I have seen many a brave shaft sped. See how yonder headland looms upon us 
through the mist! We must tack within three arrow flights, or we may find a 
rock through our timbers. " 

"But why are you not conducting the case from Baker Street?" I asked. " 

"Exactly. "You don't know Sherlock Holmes yet," he said; "perhaps you would not 
care for him as a constant companion. " 

He turned back with the Inspector, while Holmes and I walked slowly across the 
moor. We could see a tall old woman admit him, and sway with pleasure at the 
very sight of him. On enquiry we found that the constable was in bed, and we 
were shown into a little front parlour to await his coming. Henri Fournaye only 
returned from a journey to London on Tuesday last, and there is evidence to 
connect her with the crime at Westminster. A comparison of photographs has 
proved conclusively that M. 

"Hola, Gaffer Higginson!" cried Aylward, as he spied the portly figure of the 
village innkeeper. 

"What makes you think such a thing?" 

"Because Inspector Martin from Norwich has just passed through. "We come now, 
however, to a point which is of importance. " 

The Inspector opened his eyes, and the Colonel's lip curled in a sneer. That is 
why I have come. Jonas Oldacre. I knew nothing of this affair until I was in 
the train, when I read what you have just heard. Thank you. You, Carruthers, 
give me that revolver. We'll have no more violence. Come, hand it over!" 

"Who are you, then?" 

"My name is Sherlock Holmes. " 

"Good Lord!" 

"You have heard of me, I see. " 

"No, no," said I. He waved his hand to the sofa, and our palpitating visitor 
with his agitated companion sat side by side upon it. I said I would not. No 
doubt I am wrong. But Godfrey was the heir to this crabbed old nobleman, and it 
was quite certain that the news of his marriage would have been the end of his 
inheritance. " 

"But the sympathies of the latter were with the mother?" 

"Yes. " 

"Oh, you did, did you?" 

Out came the official notebook. Holmes, except that I was angry with my wife 
that night for having held me back when I might have caught the skulking 
rascal. After all, if these people had strange fads and expected obedience on 
the most extraordinary matters, they were at least ready to pay for their 
eccentricity. While a horse was being put into a trap at the local inn, we 
snatched a hurried breakfast, and so we were all ready for business when we at 
last arrived at Yoxley Old Place. As it drove by us I caught a glimpse through 
the closed window of a horribly contorted, grinning face glaring out at us. 
They were pretty, blue-eyed, yellow-haired lads, well made and sturdy, with 
bronzed skins, which spoke of a woodland life. " 

"How did that help you?" 

"It was all-important. Then Sherlock Holmes cocked his eye at me, leaning back 
on the cushions with a pleased and yet critical face, like a connoisseur who 
has just taken his first sip of a comet vintage. 'Fry them in oil with a 
dressing of Gascony,' quoth he, and then swore at me because I had not been the 
cook. 'Walawa,' thought I, 'mad master, sober man'--so away forward to the 
archers. Harrow and alas! but they were worse than the others. " 

"Would they not help you then?" 

"Nay, they sat tway and tway at a board, him that they call Aylward and the 
great red-headed man who snapped the Norman's arm-bone, and the black man from 
Norwich, and a score of others, rattling their dice in an archer's gauntlet for 
want of a box. "There has been a substitution of lodgers. " 

It was after five o'clock when Sherlock Holmes left me, but I had no time to be 
lonely, for within an hour there arrived a confectioner's man with a very large 
flat box. His name, it appeared, was Beppo, second name unknown. He was hardly 
articulate as he spoke of it. I am told that he was an excellent cyclist. " 

"Really! You surprise me. As they read it, Alleyne, who stood with Hordle John 
a few paces back from their comrade, saw the lady catch her breath, while the 
knight laughed softly to himself. The blow was a fatal one. Mrs. Tangey drinks, 
and our woman has been with her twice when she was well on, but she could get 
nothing out of her. " 

"I understand that they have had brokers in the house?" 

"Yes, but they were paid off. " 

"I understand that the yew hedge is penetrated at one point by a gate?" 

"Yes, the wicket-gate which leads on to the moor. On the contrary, you are, as 
I understand, richer by some 30 pounds, to say nothing of the minute knowledge 
which you have gained on every subject which comes under the letter A. This 
observation of his had the natural effect of removing any traces of doubt which 
might have remained in the minds of the coroner's jury. Then I met Mary 
herself--and met her again. 

"The facts are these, Mr. The scent appeared to be much hotter than before, for 
he had not even to put his nose on the ground, but tugged at his leash and 
tried to break into a run. The gunner turned damned nasty at the last, and I 
had to square him with an extra hundred dollars or it would have been nitsky 
for you and me. An open telegram lay upon the table. I was conscious of immense 
oppression upon my chest, great tightness within my head, a loud singing in my 
ears, and bright flashes before my eyes. Imagine my surprise, then, when on 
looking at Miss Cushing I perceived that her ear corresponded exactly with the 
female ear which I had just inspected. 

"Of course, my first act was to run into the waiting-room. It appeared to be 
somewhat too heavy for his strength, for in lowering it, it came down on the 
ground with some little violence. ' 

"I bowed. It was so late that I could not get back to Blackheath, so I spent 
the night at the Anerley Arms, and I knew nothing more until I read of this 
horrible affair in the morning. I have it here in my museum. We may get a 
scoop, if we are lucky. Mac?" 

"No, Mr. " 

"That's my idea, too," said White Mason. " 

"Good heavens, Holmes!" 

"I wanted information, Watson. It is when he is on a scent and is not quite 
absolutely sure yet that it is the right one that he is most taciturn. The men 
stopped and gathered in a yard which faced a high building. 

"Brother Ferrier," he said, taking a seat, and eyeing the farmer keenly from 
under his light-coloured eyelashes, "the true believers have been good friends 
to you. He was the best shot in India, and I expect that there are few better 
in London. 

"Why, Dr. 

"Then Blessington must have been Sutton. " 

The inspector laughed. I have one of my Baker Street boys mounting guard over 
him who would stick to him like a burr, go where he might. That blocks this 
end. Pray give me the results of your newspaper selections. I may look into the 
matter before then. Having taken the printed description. You may walk to the 
cab, and I shall be with you presently. We put it on a sutler's mule, and bore 
it after the army. Finally we stopped and sat panting on two rocks, while we 
watched him disappearing in the distance. 

"You have observed, of course," said he at last, "that the ears are not a pair. 
" 

I stooped under the rude lintel, and there he sat upon a stone outside, his 
gray eyes dancing with amusement as they fell upon my astonished features. He 
said that it might be the calling of a strange bird. Beside the couch was a 
wooden chair, and on the angle of the back hung a very seedy and disreputable 
hard-felt hat, much the worse for wear, and cracked in several places. When he 
turned his face McMurdo saw that it was Brother Morris, he who had incurred the 
anger of the Bodymaster the night before. That is why I say that the murrain 
was the best friend that the borel folk ever had. 

"I stayed long enough to make certain that the house was absolutely empty. " 

"And his name is?" 

"Arthur Charpentier, sub-lieutenant in Her Majesty's navy," cried Gregson, 
pompously, rubbing his fat hands and inflating his chest. I should like an 
accurate description of him and any letters of his which you can spare. 

"And now a word as to my household, Mr. If there are worse devils down yonder 
than some we could name, it's more than I'd expect. " 







THE ADVENTURE OF THE DANCING MEN 





Holmes had been seated for some hours in silence with his long, thin back 
curved over a chemical vessel in which he was brewing a particularly malodorous 
product. 

"Dear me!" said Holmes, "he seems a quiet, meek-mannered man enough, but I dare 
say that there was a lurking devil in his eyes. Nigh two months had Alleyne 
Edricson been in Castle Twynham--months which were fated to turn the whole 
current of his life, to divert it from that dark and lonely bourne towards 
which it tended, and to guide it into freer and more sunlit channels. Already 
he had learned to bless his father for that wise provision which had made him 
seek to know the world ere he had ventured to renounce it. 









The Bordeaux lists were, as has already been explained, situated upon the plain 
near the river upon those great occasions when the tilting-ground in front of 
the Abbey of St. George's, Hanover Square, was a very quiet one, no one being 
present save the father of the bride, Mr. The habit grew upon him, as I 
understand, from some foolish freak when he was at college; for having read De 
Quincey's description of his dreams and sensations, he had drenched his tobacco 
with laudanum in an attempt to produce the same effects. There was no maker's 
name; but, as Holmes had remarked, the initials "H. 

"Isn't it?" 

"You'll tell me that in a month's time. Here three men were waiting, with whom 
Lawler and Andrews held a short, eager conversation. You will then learn in 
possibly twenty cases out of the twenty-three that the waste of the day before 
has been burned or removed. " 

"So you sent the letters to my husband, and he--the noblest gentleman that ever 
lived, a man whose boots I was never worthy to lace--he broke his gallant heart 
and died. "Did not your heart sink within you? Were you not smitten with fears? 
Have you not felt a curse hang over you?" 

"I have not observed it," said the Frenchman carelessly. With my own eyes I saw 
him in the rout sweep the head from a knight of Picardy with one blow of his 
sword. 

"One day--it was in March, 1883--a letter with a foreign stamp lay upon the 
table in front of the colonel's plate. Simon," said Holmes, rising and bowing. 
"Pray take the basket-chair. And you, sir? I can recommend them, for I have 
them especially prepared by Ionides, of Alexandria. I tell you, sir, I couldn't 
move a finger, nor get my breath, till it whisked away and was gone. You'll 
find it through the length and breadth of the States, but always as an innocent 
one. " 

"Any reward this time?" asked Cormac, a thick-set, dark-faced, brutal-looking 
young man, whose ferocity had earned him the nickname of "Tiger. Meanwhile, 
come on, McMurdo, and come quietly if you don't want a gun across your head. " 

The traces of the tragedy had been removed, but the furniture within the little 
room still stood as it had been on the night of the crime. To my dismay the 
creature flew straight for the great mire, and my acquaintance never paused for 
an instant, bounding from tuft to tuft behind it, his green net waving in the 
air. None did come for a week, and then yesterday morning I found this paper 
lying on the sundial in the garden. Challenger said nothing, but looked pompous 
and puffy, as if he could if he would, so that finally Lord John asked his 
opinion direct. Challenger has fallen asleep in his chair. 

"Of course," said he,  with his clumsy and ponderous sarcasm, "Professor 
Summerlee will understand that when I speak of a pterodactyl I mean a 
stork--only it is the kind of stork which has no feathers, a leathery skin, 
membranous wings, and teeth in its jaws. 

"Now," said Sir Henry Baskerville, "perhaps you will tell me, Mr. 

"Ah, what indeed?" I murmured. "He is as eager to come as you can be to see 
him. These are the more patent facts which are to be deduced from his hat. 
Having an English job to do, they took into partnership, as any foreign 
criminal could do, this great consultant in crime. " 

We had all listened with the deepest interest to this sketch of the night's 
doings, which Holmes had deduced from signs so subtle and minute that, even 
when he had pointed them out to us, we could scarcely follow him in his 
reasoning. I had two completed letters already waiting. 

It seems, however, that there must have been some short cut for those who knew 
it, for before I had reached the road I was astounded to see Miss Stapleton 
sitting upon a rock by the side of the track. "It was Mr. Draw on old lad, for 
I have come between you and the clout. " 

"On we went then," said Aylward, after a long pull at his blackjack. Moriarty 
may have been engaged to engineer it on a promise of part spoils, or he may 
have been paid so much down to manage it. A confederate--and even that one 
glance had told me how dangerous a man that confederate was--had kept guard 
while the Professor had attacked me. M. ," I read. Another heading was 
"Argentine," another "Costa Rica," and another "San Paulo," each with pages of 
signs and figures after it. 

"What do you make of these?" asked Holmes. You must keep on until you do. It is 
so vast, and so barren, and so mysterious. Might I ask you to hand me my 
violin, and we will postpone all further thought upon this business until we 
have had the advantage of meeting Dr. " 

But in spite of this earnest prohibition, Professor Summerlee laid down his 
pipe and for the rest of our journey he entertained--or failed to entertain--us 
by a succession of bird and animal cries which seemed so absurd that my tears 
were suddenly changed into boisterous laughter, which must have become quite 
hysterical as I sat opposite this grave Professor and saw him--or rather heard 
him--in the character of the uproarious rooster or the puppy whose tail had 
been trodden upon. I had already made a note of that effect," said Lestrade 
complacently. " 

"You must find time for him if you have none for anything else. He ran out and 
ran in, smoked incessantly, played snatches on his violin, sank into reveries, 
devoured sandwiches at irregular hours, and hardly answered the casual 
questions which I put to him. A few yards off he stopped under a lamp-post and 
laughed in the hearty, noiseless fashion which was peculiar to him. Over the 
wide expanse there was no sound and no movement. In another instant he stood at 
the side of the hole and was hauling after him a companion, lithe and small 
like himself, with a pale face and a shock of very red hair. I had just time to 
throw my arms round his ascending waist when I was myself whipped up into the 
air. " 

Holmes raised his eyebrows. "And this is Thursday morning. But methinks that we 
are very welcome here, for already they come forth to meet us. 

"They will soon come now, Massa Malone. "What do you make of it?" 

I stooped to the hole, and recoiled in horror. " 

"Mon Dieu! if a man could eat himself into knighthood, Humphrey, you had been a 
banneret at the least," observed another, amid a burst of laughter. Holmes. 

"I will call again in the evening," said he to the expectant landlady. 

McGinty released his hold, and Baldwin, cowed and shaken gasping for breath, 
and shivering in every limb, as one who has looked over the very edge of death, 
sat up on the barrel over which he had been hurled. I picked it up cheap from 
Harding Brothers, two doors from the High Street Station. " 

"How did you know that?" 

"Oh, it got about--things do get about for good and for bad in this district. 

"You are an impudent fellow!" cried Theresa. "It is a capital mistake to 
theorize before you have all the evidence. Oh, but I have been sorely tried 
this day!" 

Our companion patted her thin, work-worn hand, and murmured some few words of 
kindly womanly comfort which brought the color back into the others bloodless 
cheeks. I staggered to my feet and ran with her along the corridor and down a 
winding stair. ' 

"All the time that she was telling me this story she never once looked in my 
direction, and her voice was quite unlike her usual tones. It may well have 
been cause and effect. Many of the bowmen had drawn amulets and relics from 
their bosoms, while he who possessed some more than usually sanctified treasure 
passed it down the line of his comrades, that all might kiss and reap the 
virtue. Now, after thirteen years, I will give the true details of this 
inconceivable affair to the public. There was no slit through which a knife 
could be passed to raise the bar. " 

"Then I shall want two stanch men, in case of resistance. 

"It's only the facts that we want. "There is some devilry going forward!  Why 
should such a message stop in such a way?  I should put Scotland Yard in touch 
with this business--and yet, it is too pressing for us to leave. At present it 
may not be, for mine arm is stiff from this small touch, and I would fain do 
you full honor when we cross swords again. "If you want good men you should pay 
them a good price," said I. Go, raise this money upon our own jewels, if nought 
else may serve, and see that it be paid over to Don Fernando. " 

"In security I offer----" cried Don Pedro. " 

"But they were true. Then the front ranks began to surge slowly forward, to 
trot, to canter, to gallop, and in an instant the whole vast array was hurtling 
onward, line after line, the air full of the thunder of their cries, the ground 
shaking with the beat of their hoofs, the valley choked with the rushing 
torrent of steel, topped by the waving plumes, the slanting spears and the 
fluttering banderoles. 

"And then in an instant the key of the riddle was in my hands, and I saw that 
every third word, beginning with the first, would give a message which might 
well drive old Trevor to despair. "You can see for yourselves that some one is 
there. I drew your attention to it; but with the pressure of other events you 
had hardly the time to give it the consideration which would have enabled you 
to draw deductions from it. If you take me, Hilton, you will take a woman who 
has nothing that she need be personally ashamed of, but you will have to be 
content with my word for it, and to allow me to be silent as to all that passed 
up to the time when I became yours. I pulled out my knife, and--well, there! 
I've said enough. It took all my self-control to prevent me from breaking out 
into a cry of astonishment. There is much food for thought in Richter. There 
are the folk enjoying themselves upon the golf-links and the laborers yonder 
cutting the corn. That was the train of events as far as I can decipher them. 
We're not likely to forget him. Captain Marvin is my name. His uncle had died, 
leaving him a fortune, and he had left the army, yet he could stoop to treat 
five men as he had treated us. They have not shown any sign of being in funds. 

It was pitch dark and very oppressive under his hood. "There is much that is 
still obscure, though I have quite made up my mind on the main facts. "He is 
dead. I fear that your man will come by little honor with him. They appeared to 
be terrified at the prospect of repeating it, but the chief has patriarchal 
powers in these countries, and if the bargain is good in his eyes the clansman 
has little choice in the matter. Twice Henderson has lashed at folk with his 
dog-whip, and only his long purse and heavy compensation have kept him out of 
the courts. His grasp relaxed, his feet slipped, and in an instant he was a 
crushed and mangled corpse upon the sharp ridges beneath him. Drebber answered 
that the matter was a delicate one, and that he must go alone. " 

"At what address?" 

"American Exchange, Strand--to be left till called for. But, in any case a 
forced marriage is no marriage, but it is a very serious felony, as you will 
discover before you have finished. A lesson, an actual experience, was needed 
to bring it home. This and a bellowing, roaring, rumbling voice made up my 
first impression of the notorious Professor Challenger. I leave that paper with 
his breakfast every morning. " 

"That was like following the brook to the parent lake. "At the end of that time 
she shall give her answer. Your idea is an excellent one, Lord John. You have 
worked with it, and the muscles are more developed. " 

"Did you find your brougham?" 

"Yes, it was waiting. "Did not your heart sink within you? Were you not smitten 
with fears? Have you not felt a curse hang over you?" 

"I have not observed it," said the Frenchman carelessly. With my own eyes I saw 
him in the rout sweep the head from a knight of Picardy with one blow of his 
sword. Year passed into year, his black hair turned grizzled, but still he 
wandered on, a human bloodhound, with his mind wholly set upon the one object 
upon which he had devoted his life. At last his perseverance was rewarded. The 
maid stood petrified for a moment, and then, recovering her courage, she ran 
downstairs. See this smear where it has trickled down the wall! That disposes 
of the idea of suicide anyhow. They had driven him home a dozen times from 
Serpentine-mews, and knew all about him. 

Nor had they cause, as the result was to show. What was it?" 

I was so shocked at the sudden and strange appearance of this ape-man that I 
hesitated whether I should not climb down again and tell my experience to my 
companions. The cellar! There was the end of this tangled clue. Ere the sun had 
sunk again he was dead, and I the prisoner of Sir John Chandos. Yet it is not 
every question that she can answer, but only those----" 

"Bertrand, Bertrand!" cried the lady in the same muttering far-away voice, "the 
blessed hour passes. Already Alleyne could hear the crackling and roaring of 
the flames, while the air was heavy with heat and full of the pungent whiff of 
burning wood. But in addition to this he impressed his comrades with the idea 
that among them all there was not one whose brain was so ready to devise a 
bloodthirsty scheme, or whose hand would be more capable of carrying it out. " 

"You have lost one of your boots?" 

"My dear sir," cried Dr. " 

"I saw his sketch-book. In spite of his capacity for concealing his emotions, I 
could easily see that Holmes was in a state of suppressed excitement, while I 
was myself tingling with that half-sporting, half-intellectual pleasure which I 
invariably experienced when I associated myself with him in his investigations. 
A handful of villainous half-breeds dominated the country, armed such Indians 
as would support them, and turned the rest into slaves, terrorizing them with 
the most inhuman tortures in order to force them to gather the india-rubber, 
which was then floated down the river to Para. I have not heard him laugh 
often, and it has always boded ill to somebody. I then worked the lawn very 
carefully for signs and traces, but this drought has made everything as hard as 
iron. Here are four prints where the beast has been standing motionless. It is 
this page. 

"From the contents of the knapsack it was evident that this man had been an 
artist and poet in search of effects. "If I can only find what the fellow is 
driving at by reconciling all these accomplishments, and discovering a calling 
which needs them all," I said to myself, "I may as well give up the attempt at 
once. " 

"It passed by the blighted beech there," said Alleyne, pointing, "and the 
hounds were hard at its heels. Paul! it seemed strange to my eye when I wrote 
it," said Sir Nigel. " 

A blast upon the bugle summoned the bowmen to counsel, and they gathered in 
little knots and groups around a great fallen tree which lay athwart the glade. 
There was never any outline. Waldron has accomplished his object well, that 
object being to give a simple and interesting account of what he conceives to 
have been the history of our planet. But this interjection appeared to him so 
absurd that he was at a loss how to deal with it. To his north would be 
Flanders and the country of the Eastlanders and of the Muscovites. No, no, we 
shall all be justified when we see the tenants of High Gable at the next 
Guildford Assizes. Can you make anything of the inscription, Ames?" 

"No, sir, nothing. "We have both tried, and we have both failed. 

"I shall be most happy to tell you anything I can," the constable answered with 
his eyes upon the little golden disk. " 

"Perhaps," Challenger answered, "you would have the kindness to suggest what 
you think we ought to do. "We can't afford to take chances in a country like 
this. "  We hurried down the village street and found, as we had expected, that 
the inspector was just leaving his lodgings. "But, to be brief over the matter, 
my father would have none of his wooing, nor in sooth would I. " 

"Not another word shall I speak," said Aylward; "but here is a franc for thee 
and I crave thy blessing. I don't insist upon it. Then, when I flash a light 
upon them, close in swiftly. The German, though he reeled for an instant before 
the thrust of the Englishman, struck his opponent so fairly upon the vizor that 
the laces burst, the plumed helmet flew to pieces, and Sir Nigel galloped on 
down the lists with his bald head shimmering in the sunshine. Of all ruins, 
that of a noble mind is the most deplorable. It is certain also, that the brave 
and worthy Bertrand de Guesclin hath ridden into France to the Duke of Anjou, 
and purposes to take back with him great levies from Picardy and Brittany. 

"Here is Herr Heidegger, sure enough!" cried Holmes, exultantly. " 

"But how?" 

"Through the skylight. The most difficult crime to track is the one which is 
purposeless. So each of my cases displaces the last, and Mlle. Why are they 
lying, and what is the truth which they are trying so hard to conceal? Let us 
try, Watson, you and I, if we can get behind the lie and reconstruct the truth. 
' 

"'Good! That's a promise,' said he, rising from his chair. ' Let us glance at 
our Continental Gazetteer. " 

I sat in the window with the volume in my hand, but my thoughts were far from 
the daring speculations of the writer. 



Four days later Holmes and I were again in the train, bound for Winchester to 
see the race for the Wessex Cup. 'It is a dangerous habit to finger loaded 
firearms in the pocket of one's dressing-gown. I could get nothing more. I 
swear it. We will be shown into the sitting-room to wait for the lady, but it 
is probable that when she comes she may find neither us nor the photograph. " 

"And what then?" 

"You must leave that to me. He snatched off the dark beard which had disguised 
him and threw it on the ground, disclosing a long, sallow, clean-shaven face 
below it. His room was on the ground-floor, and he could get out when he liked. 
The man was dying--dying from hunger and from thirst. Smith heard of her 
husband. " 

"No, I think that may be dismissed. 

The pressman looked even more perplexed. "No, young fellah my lad, there is no 
use deceiving yourself. "I'll hold you against the world, Ettie, right here 
where we are!" 

"Why should we not leave together?" 

"No, Ettie, I can't leave here. I would have gone straight up and told him so, 
only I thought it was but fair to you to take your opinion first. The landlord 
further informed me that there are usually week-end visitors--'a warm lot, 
sir'--at the Hall, and especially one gentleman with a red moustache, Mr. 

"I can well remember driving up to his house in the evening some three weeks 
before the fatal event. I have said that his Alpine-stock had been left leaning 
against a rock which jutted on to the path. Almost at once I came upon what I 
expected. One piece, about three feet in length, had a very marked indentation 
at one end, while several were flattened at the sides as if they had been 
compressed by some considerable weight. Evidently one has fallen off and been 
replaced. We took the wrong one. " 

Following Sir Nigel's counsel, they pressed on upon foot until they were close 
to the prince's secretary, who was in high debate with a young and foppish 
knight, who was bent upon making his way past him. Perhaps the villain was 
softened by the woman's entreaties. I remembered a German being found in New 
York with RACHE written up above him, and it was argued at the time in the 
newspapers that the secret societies must have done it. I'm a frontiersman from 
the extreme edge of the Knowable, and I feel quite out of place when I leave my 
study and come into touch with all you great, rough, hulking creatures. You 
smile, Friend Watson. " 

"Sure, we are all in it together," said Scanlan, McMurdo's mate, as the four 
sat together at supper. "What then?" said he. " 

"Well, I refuse to answer. 

"And shall again, camarade, I doubt not. Soon, however, it took a wider range. 
The supply of adult women was running short, and polygamy without a female 
population on which to draw was a barren doctrine indeed. " 

Holmes shook his head impatiently. " He seated himself upon his desk, his 
short, stumpy legs swinging in front of him. " 

"Then, come. Let our young friend give it a name," said Challenger. And now, 
Watson, it only remains for us to find out by wire the identity of the cabman, 
No. The small men could not harm us. A face was looking in at us out of the 
darkness. There was no reason why those six should be different from any of the 
other casts. Listen as one may, there is no shadow of a sound in all that 
mighty wilderness; nothing but silence--complete and heart-subduing silence. , 
Mr. " 

"So did a many," quoth Simon. The crime committed, they quarrelled as to who 
had actually struck the fatal blow, and amused one another and the company by 
describing the cries and contortions of the murdered man. 

"Well," said I, "has this precious relation of yours departed, or is he still 
lurking out yonder?" 

"I don't know, sir. I hope to heaven that he has gone, for he has brought 
nothing but trouble here! I've not heard of him since I left out food for him 
last, and that was three days ago. First at him who flaunts with my lady's 
silken frock. " 

It was evident that Miss Cushing had come upon a subject on which she felt very 
deeply. This narrow margin of grass between the path and the flower-bed. 



MURDER IN WESTMINSTER 



A crime of mysterious character was committed last night at 16 Godolphin 
Street, one of the old-fashioned and secluded rows of eighteenth century houses 
which lie between the river and the Abbey, almost in the shadow of the great 
Tower of the Houses of Parliament. 'Half-confidences are worse than none. 
Besides, you do not know how much we know of it. " 

"That settles this exit. " 

"Well, I am glad from my heart that you are here, for indeed the responsibility 
and the mystery were both becoming too much for my nerves. "We must back to 
camp, and ere three days I trust that we may see these Spaniards again. It was 
a small rift, not larger than a window, but it was enough for all our purposes. 
Some people without possessing genius have a remarkable power of stimulating 
it. Others were of a date during the reconstruction of the Southern states, and 
were mostly concerned with politics, for he had evidently taken a strong part 
in opposing the carpet-bag politicians who had been sent down from the North. 
He was a brave man, but he trembled at the vague, shadowy terrors which hung 
over him. No plume or nobloy fluttered from his plain tilting salade, and even 
his lance was devoid of the customary banderole. " 

"Who locked up the plans that night?" 

"Mr. " 

"Exactly. I'll do what you advise. He is a violent, dangerous, cantankerous 
character, hated by everyone who comes across him, and the butt of the 
students, so far as they dare take a liberty with him. In all probability the 
murderer had a florid face, and the finger-nails of his right hand were 
remarkably long. Things have taken a turn which I could not have anticipated. 

"I believe that you are a wizard, Mr. Watson; but it is this way," said he: 
"When I was speaking to the other chap in London, at the time that he laughed 
at my not going to Mawson's, I happened to notice that his tooth was stuffed in 
this very identical fashion. Now I am assured that this is not so. It went to 
my heart to do it, though. Ten days later they were married in Chicago, with 
old Jacob Shafter as witness of the wedding. After him there came a second man, 
and after him a third, a fourth, and a fifth stealing across the narrow open 
space and darting into the shelter of the brushwood. While a horse was being 
put into a trap at the local inn, we snatched a hurried breakfast, and so we 
were all ready for business when we at last arrived at Yoxley Old Place. She 
had round red arms, a dress of some sober woollen stuff, and a brass brooch the 
size of a cheese-cake stuck in the front of it. What does her clever stepfather 
do then? He conceives an idea more creditable to his head than to his heart. 
Lord! but we're in luck! We will fix him before he can do any harm. See here, 
Morris, will you leave this thing in my hands?" 

"Sure, if you will only take it off mine. " 

"They are coming from work in the yard. " 

The freckles started out on the lady's face. He wouldn't have any visitors if 
he could help it, and he used to say that a woman should be happy in her own 
family circle. Incredible as it may appear to you, Mr. Holmes, he was honestly 
convinced that a dreadful fate overhung his family, and certainly the records 
which he was able to give of his ancestors were not encouraging. And yet it is 
such an absurd business, that I hesitated to bother you about it. 

Having made one or two tentative remarks to the nearest miner, and receiving 
only short, gruff replies, the traveller resigned himself to uncongenial 
silence, staring moodily out of the window at the fading landscape. I know that 
it will seem then to be some wild nightmare, some delirium of fever. I'm a 
free-born American, and it's all new to me. I don't know that I am more afraid 
of death than the rest of you, for I am an oldish man, and, come what may, I 
can't have very much longer to live; but it is all against my nature to sit 
waiting without a struggle like a sheep for the butcher. " 

"Oh, an Irish-American?" 

"If you heard him talk you would not doubt it. "Shillings have not been so 
plentiful with me as they once were," he remarked. "I had no doubt that the 
gang of roughs who assaulted me had carried off both my hat and the bird. But 
mark these houses, Alleyne, how they thrust forth upon the top. Thence I went 
straight to a friend in America. Worn and exhausted, he leaned upon his rifle 
and shook his gaunt hand fiercely at the silent widespread city beneath him. As 
he looked at it, he observed that there were flags in some of the principal 
streets, and other signs of festivity. Disregarding my presence, she went 
straight to her uncle and passed her hand over his head with a sweet womanly 
caress. 

"You have given orders that Arthur should be liberated, have you not, dad?" she 
asked. I waited until he had passed out of sight and then I followed him. " 

He spoke in little, sharp, jerky outbursts, and it seemed to me that to speak 
at all was very painful to him, and that his will all through was overriding 
his inclinations. "Many a time when the master has rolled up his sleeves I have 
noticed that very mark. I have seen old John Hawkwood, the same who has led 
half the Company into Italy, stand laughing in his beard as he heard it, until 
his plates rattled again. Here it is, and you can read for yourself. When I 
found that the leading international agent, who had just left London, lived in 
a row of houses which abutted upon the Underground, I was so pleased that you 
were a little astonished at my sudden frivolity. The candles and the fire must 
have burned out hours before, and they had been sitting there in the dark until 
dawn had broken. If there is an afternoon train to town, Watson, I think we 
should do well to take it, as I have a chemical analysis of some interest to 
finish, and this investigation draws rapidly to a close. Mary saw the devil's 
light in my eyes, and she ran forward with her hands on my sleeve. 

"'Where have you put it?' asked Arthur. I climbed half-way up the rock before I 
shot him. I heard her voice downstairs, but I knew that she could not ascend. 
Out I ran and through the shrubbery, but thank God there was no one there. On 
the other side of the bushes a shoe was projecting. I dare say that I could 
throw myself over a precipice, like the Hun in the history books, if my courage 
to do it were questioned, and yet it would surely be pride and fear, rather 
than courage, which would be my inspiration. This was the power which now 
carried me onwards. But never mind that. Will you fix it, Brother Baldwin?" 

"Sure!" said the young man eagerly. 

"Tut, John," whispered Aylward, "you never were a marksman. 

A heavily timbered park stretched up in a gentle slope, thickening into a grove 
at the highest point. His very person and appearance were such as to strike the 
attention of the most casual observer. Yet this emaciation seemed to be his 
natural habit, and due to no disease, for his eye was bright, his step brisk, 
and his bearing assured. 

But terrible indeed was the cost at which the last had been repelled. "However, 
as you know, my habits are irregular, and such a feat means less to me than to 
most men. The treasure must afterwards be handed over to the authorities until 
after the official investigation. " 

"Pray let us have it, for all that. " 

I saw by the baronet's clouded brow that he was deeply hurt by what he regarded 
as our desertion. " 

"Very good, very good," said Holmes, smiling. He is a man of good birth and 
excellent education, endowed by nature with a phenomenal mathematical faculty. 
It was a nightmare, the grey, dusty church, the rows of agonized figures, the 
dimness and silence of it all. 

But it was only for a moment that we were at fault. 

"Then you have none in me?" 

"In your friendship, certainly. 

"And would rather sit distrait by her oriel than ride gayly to the chase as of 
old. At the foot of the stairs, however, she met this Lascar scoundrel of whom 
I have spoken, who thrust her back and, aided by a Dane, who acts as assistant 
there, pushed her out into the street. Mortimer Tregennis, an independent 
gentleman, who increased the clergyman's scanty resources by taking rooms in 
his large, straggling house. " 

"He being the heir?" 

"Yes. But he was off like a deer after the shot that killed poor William Kirwan 
was fired. There was unappeasable hatred in their eyes. We carried the box, 
therefore, into the same hall where we had buried the body, and there, under 
certain bricks in the best-preserved wall, we made a hollow and put our 
treasure. The fellow must be somewhere. And then we got talking. 





ADVENTURE II. Laura Lyons was in her office, and Sherlock Holmes opened his 
interview with a frankness and directness which considerably amazed her. 

"That is one of the points upon which your own researches have shed a light. 
Here it was that one evening we received a visit from an acquaintance, Mr. The 
most, however, were young and dandy archers, with fresh English faces, their 
beards combed out, their hair curling from under their close steel hufkens, 
with gold or jewelled earrings gleaming in their ears, while their 
gold-spangled baldrics, their silken belts, and the chains which many of them 
wore round their thick brown necks, all spoke of the brave times which they had 
had as free companions. There only remains Mrs. 

The sun was just above the western sky-line, and the evening was a particularly 
bright and clear one, so that the whole extent of the plateau was visible 
beneath me. " 

And my words were true, for shortly after eight a hansom dashed up to the door 
and our friend got out of it. 

"Whither? To the devil if ye will. " 

"Perhaps they have not heard yet of all that happened here during the night?" 

"Maybe not, sir. It was clear that he thought that our night's work might be a 
serious one. I am much indebted to you for directing my attention to this case, 
Mr. 

"They were very near doing it for all that. "I confess that I have been as 
blind as a mole, but it is better to learn wisdom late than never to learn it 
at all. " 

"I'd like to know," said McMurdo, "how you ever came to learn that I had spoken 
with Morris at all?" 

McGinty laughed. 

"Among the gifts which have been vouchsafed to my wife," said Du Guesclin, 
"there is the wondrous one of seeing into the future; but it comes very seldom 
upon her, and goes as quickly, for none can command it. She appeared to be 
dazzled by the sudden blaze of light, and after dropping a curtsey, she stood 
blinking at us with her bleared eyes and fumbling in her pocket with nervous, 
shaky fingers. She came down and brought money with her, trying to bribe me to 
go. She is a sunbeam in my house--sweet, loving, beautiful, a wonderful manager 
and housekeeper, yet as tender and quiet and gentle as a woman could be. Why, 
bless my soul! here is her carriage at the door. He is the very type of 
conventional British respectability, and the very man as a witness to impress 
another Briton. I think I will leave him to tell his very remarkable experience 
in his own fashion. We got away with the gold, became wealthy men, and made our 
way over to England without being suspected. We were given a suit of sailor 
togs each, a barrel of water, two casks, one of junk and one of biscuits, and a 
compass. Would you care to come?" 

"It's just what I want. "Well, then, listen to what I say, and do as I order 
you, for indeed it's the only way for us. Come, Watson! As to you, sir, I trust 
that a bright future awaits you in Rhodesia. " 

"My good Summerlee, this etheric poison is most certainly influenced by 
material agents. We are only just in time to prevent some subtle and horrible 
crime. " 

"Then I must back to my pasty," said Sir Oliver. Being a heavy stick the dog 
has held it tightly by the middle, and the marks of his teeth are very plainly 
visible. It was clear, from the moment of his rising, that he had a number of 
friends and sympathizers in the hall, though they formed a minority in the 
audience. But I can assure you that so far as the essentials go--the storage of 
munitions, the preparation for submarine attack, the arrangements for making 
high explosives--nothing is prepared. There is one, Francois Villet, at Cahors, 
who will send me wine-casks for my cloth-bales, so to Cahors I will go, though 
all the robber-knights of Christendom were to line the roads like yonder 
poplars. Holmes, in a nutshell, and if you can help us to clear it up you will 
have done a great work. I meant no harm, and yet he would have thought it 
criminal. He dodged round the table as quick as an eel, and a moment later he'd 
got his gun from under his coat. 

And now, having brought you up to date in the escaped convict, the Stapletons, 
Dr. Holmes, what in thunder is the meaning of that, and who it is that takes so 
much interest in my affairs?" 

"What do you make of it, Dr. And you also, Dr. Sherlock Holmes, and this is Dr. 
Watson. But why--what's amiss with the names?" 

The inspector looked from one to the other of us in dazed astonishment. I 
wouldn't frighten Kate--poor little Kate. 

It was after tea on a summer evening, and the conversation, which had roamed in 
a desultory, spasmodic fashion from golf clubs to the causes of the change in 
the obliquity of the ecliptic, came round at last to the question of atavism 
and hereditary aptitudes. 

"You have two sisters, I believe. 

"Why should you not take the chance of perpetuating your own name?" said 
Summerlee, with his usual touch of acidity. 'Give him no cause for fear. Send 
us in with him, and we shall do the rest while you stay here on guard. Besides, 
it is the season of forgiveness. He could not explain what had become of the 
assassin or why he had not taken his bicycle, if it were indeed his. So far as 
I could understand the account of the natives, he was a complete stranger to 
them, and had come upon their village through the woods alone and in the last 
stage of exhaustion. I approached and knocked at the door, which was instantly 
opened by a tall, gaunt woman with a harsh, forbidding face. " 

"Where are the slippers now?" 

"They are still under the chair in the hall. 

"And shall again, camarade, I doubt not. " 

"So I am. Toller," said Holmes, "for you have certainly cleared up everything 
which puzzled us. And here comes the country surgeon and Mrs. If she were 
changing, so was he. If they come the other way, we can get through the door if 
our job is done, or hide behind these window curtains if it is not. If she does 
not love your Majesty, there is no reason why she should interfere with your 
Majesty's plan. I wonder what your friend Holmes would do if he were here. I 
only quote this as a trivial example of observation and inference. That was 
why, being fond and hot-headed, I left the world; and that is why, having had 
time to take thought, I am right glad to find myself back in it once more. 

"Have you found anything out yet?" she asked. But poverty was heavy upon him, 
his land was scant, his coffers empty, and the very castle which covered him 
the holding of another. Through the silence of the great forest there came a 
swishing, whistling sound, mingled with the most dolorous groans, and the voice 
of a man raised in a high quavering kind of song. Several rolls of paper lay 
around him. It was not yet three when we found ourselves in our rooms once 
more. No, it was done elsewhere, I should say. " 

"And why is he here?" 

"Because an illustrious client has placed her piteous case in my hands. 

"Have you dragged the basin of Trafalgar Square fountain?" he asked. "But look 
here, mister, I don't care for folk poking about my place without my leave, so 
the sooner you pay your score and get out of this the better I shall be 
pleased. Holmes, I invite your attention to the kitchen. But I commend the idea 
to your mind. " 

"Other things being equal," said Holmes, "one would suspect the one at whose 
head the master threw a decanter. I can hardly see how the lady could have 
acted otherwise, though her abrupt method of doing it was undoubtedly to be 
regretted. I sprang from my bed, wrapped a shawl round me, and rushed into the 
corridor. " He drew on his gloves, closed the door, and marched off down the 
street. But the sun already is low in the west, and there will scarce be light 
for these courses. Why a cut-off shotgun of all weapons--and an American one at 
that? How could they be so sure that the sound of it would not bring someone on 
to them? It's a mere chance as it is that Mrs. Many men do it when they are 
trying to learn anything by heart. Their escort did not halt, however, but 
pushed on, followed by a great crowd of Mormons, until they reached a waggon, 
which was conspicuous for its great size and for the gaudiness and smartness of 
its appearance. It would all end, as it had done in the past, in aimless talk 
and possibly in impotent arrests. 

"A monstrous bat!" I suggested. "But how of England, my lads of Loring?" 

"I take it," said Ford, "that it is much as it was when you were there last, 
save that perchance there is a little less noise there. " 

"Ah, yes--the so-called Porlock is a link in the chain some little way from its 
great attachment. 

A tall, sunburned, capable-looking, clean-shaved man looked in at us. "You 
shall see the body at the mortuary, but we have made nothing of it up to now. " 

"And I feel dissatisfied. We have already a clue. 

The situation was a curious one. "Priory Road. Lark Hall Lane. Stockwell Place. 
Robert Street. Cold Harbor Lane. Our quest does not appear to take us to very 
fashionable regions. That his advances should be rejected so brusquely without 
any reference to the lady's own wishes and that the lady should accept the 
situation without protest is very amazing. Save for the occasional use of 
cocaine, he had no vices, and he only turned to the drug as a protest against 
the monotony of existence when cases were scanty and the papers uninteresting. 
Leaving it all where we descended, we started at once for Zambo's camp. Having 
reached the Union House, some of them mixed with the crowd in McGinty's saloon, 
whispering across the bar to the Boss that the job had been well carried 
through. She promises him then not to go there again, but two days afterwards 
the hope of getting rid of those dreadful neighbors was too strong for her, and 
she made another attempt, taking down with her the photograph which had 
probably been demanded from her. Framed in the bright light of the open 
doorway, it seemed to McMurdo that he had never seen a more beautiful picture; 
the more attractive for its contrast with the sordid and gloomy surroundings. A 
lovely violet growing upon one of those black slag-heaps of the mines would not 
have seemed more surprising. The instant that he heard of it he made a complete 
confession to me, so filled was he with horror and remorse. I told Holmes how 
the matter stood, my heart bubbling over with thankfulness and joy. People tell 
me that I have spoiled him. I had persuaded myself that we should find Mr. But, 
say, there's one bit of advice I'll give you before we part: If you're in 
trouble in Vermissa, go straight to the Union House and see Boss McGinty. Ye 
have chosen me as a leader, and a leader I will be if ye come with me to Spain; 
and I vow to you that my pennon of the five roses shall, if God give me 
strength and life, be ever where there is most honor to be gained. I ain't 
afeared of anything on this side o' the grave; but I thought that maybe it was 
him that died o' the typhoid inspecting the drains what killed him. " 

"I have heard you say that it is difficult for a man to have any object in 
daily use without leaving the impress of his individuality upon it in such a 
way that a trained observer might read it. What was he, then? If he was in the 
hospital and yet not on the staff he could only have been a house-surgeon or a 
house-physician--little more than a senior student. The more I thought, the 
more extraordinary and inexplicable did it appear. From the front window upon 
the left of the door there peeped a glimmer of a feeble light. As Alleyne 
walked up to it he perceived that it was rudely fashioned out of beams of wood, 
with twinkling lights all over where the glow from within shone through the 
chinks. Alone, I should have been ignorant of the names of these giant growths, 
but our men of science pointed out the cedars, the great silk cotton trees, and 
the redwood trees, with all that profusion of various plants which has made 
this continent the chief supplier to the human race of those gifts of Nature 
which depend upon the vegetable world, while it is the most backward in those 
products which come from animal life. Vivid orchids and wonderful colored 
lichens smoldered upon the swarthy tree-trunks and where a wandering shaft of 
light fell full upon the golden allamanda, the scarlet star-clusters of the 
tacsonia, or the rich deep blue of ipomaea, the effect was as a dream of 
fairyland. In these great wastes of forest, life, which abhors darkness, 
struggles ever upwards to the light. This outsider had to take originals. Then 
the lump of basalt was fastened to the thongs, and the rope was allowed to hang 
from the end of it, being passed three times round the Professor's arm. When it 
was well alight he and his two companions took to their heels, and were some 
distance off, safe and snug in a sheltering ditch, before the shattering roar 
of the explosion, with the low, deep rumble of the collapsing building, told 
them that their work was done. He said no more; but I fancy that I could guess 
at that lady's august name, and I have little doubt that the emerald pin will 
forever recall to my friend's memory the adventure of the Bruce-Partington 
plans. I suppose five foot six would be about it. " 

"Oh, yes you do, McMurdo," cried Sherlock Holmes, genially. " 

"Thank you. Blessington," cried Dr. Trevelyan. He proposes to call at about 
quarter past six to-morrow evening, if Dr. Douglas was a rich gentleman who had 
made his money in America. I am sure they do. I assure you my cheeks flushed at 
the very thought. This was a man from whom much honor might be gained, and I 
have seldom met any one for whom I have conceived so much love and esteem. " 

"I am sure that you are right, Mr. "I can see the pennons of De Couvette, De 
Brieux, Saint Pol, and many others who struck in against us for Charles of 
Blois. It may be that I am myself at fault for not following up the hint which 
you conveyed to me through my friend, Dr. " 

I was bitterly hurt. "That's the end of the black blood. Time was when your 
ears were clipped. When he was ruined I came to the college as servant, but I 
never forgot my old employer because he was down in the world. About 1869 or 
1870 he came back to Europe and took a small estate in Sussex, near Horsham. 
Large masses of nickel and of tin were discovered stored in an out-house, but 
no coins were to be found, which may have explained the presence of those bulky 
boxes which have been already referred to. 

Our professors would gladly have stayed there all day, so entranced were they 
by this opportunity of studying the life of a prehistoric age. Don't tell me 
that he assaulted you. Come over here now!" He seized me by the coat-sleeve in 
his eagerness, and drew me over to the table at which he had been working. ' 

"I followed him to the top of a very lofty stair, and there, right under the 
slates, were a couple of empty, dusty little rooms, uncarpeted and uncurtained, 
into which he led me. 'That is the way to prosper! You won't mind my testing 
you, will you? Let me see. 'He sent it to me in that state, with his curse, 
upon my wedding morning. ' 

"'Well,' said I, 'at least he has forgiven you now, since he has left all his 
property to your son. I'll have the other, and I'll take it now,' said I. He'll 
see that that's horse sense. I've been on his track for years and have never 
set eyes on him yet. " 

"I hope that I may have the pleasure of introducing you to-night. Sir Nigel 
blinked at them in amazement, and a look of the deepest sorrow shadowed his 
face. Often had Alleyne curled his lip at the beggarly craving for land or for 
gold which blinded man to the higher and more lasting issues of life. Now it 
seemed as though it were only by this same land and gold that he might hope to 
reach his heart's desire. To begin at the beginning. " 

I turned it over in my mind. I had my net drawn tightly round Mr. A man was 
crouching at the window. They still piled the brushwood round the base of the 
tower, and gambolled hand in hand around the blaze, screaming out the doggerel 
lines which had long been the watchword of the Jacquerie: 



Cessez, cessez, gens d'armes et pietons, 

De piller et manger le bonhomme 

Qui de longtemps Jacques Bonhomme 

Se nomme. Dry and worm-eaten, a spark upon them became a smoulder, and a 
smoulder a blaze. A choking smoke filled the air, and the five could scarce 
grope their way to the staircase which led up to the very summit of the square 
tower. A fig for thy curse! Bide here, if you will take my rede, for we will 
make England too hot for such as you, when Master Wicliff has the ordering of 
it. Gregson of Scotland Yard. There's three folk come out since he went in, but 
I'll swear he wasn't one of them. You speak to your mate upon the left 
to-night, and see if he is to be trusted. " 

"Is he quiet?" 

"Oh, he gives no trouble. I fear that they will have little to shout over this 
tourney, for my gold vase has small prospect of crossing the water. Lord John 
was still struggling with his buffalo story, so far as I could make out, while 
once again I heard, as of old, the deep rumble of Challenger and the insistent 
accents of Summerlee as their brains locked in high and fierce scientific 
debate. 

"It is worth noting," Challenger continued, "that our young friend has received 
an undoubted stab, while Lord John's coat could only have been torn by a bite. 

"Brag and bounce!" thought I to myself. Then, of course, she might give us very 
important information, but I was not sanguine that she would. The one was our 
comrade, Professor Challenger. 

"I am delighted that you have come down, Mr. I should like, for example, to see 
how far the windows of the bedrooms command the front. "  He hurried for the 
door, and knocked in his peculiar way. 

"Well, Mr. I can't say that she did not give me every chance of getting out of 
it if I wished to do so. " 

I took out my revolver and laid it on the corner of the table. You know how 
masterful he is. From the first I had determined that I would myself preside 
over your investigation. That angular shadow up yonder was the bait, and we 
were the hunters. But now we come on the nasty, angular, uncompromising bits 
which won't slip into their places. I knew the lad well, and I loved him for 
his many excellent qualities. I could not tell if the face were that of a man 
or a woman. At last he outs into the passage, and he cries, 'Is that man never 
goin' to come?' Those were his very words, sir. In the very midst of the 
scuffle, however, whilst Alleyne braced himself to feel the cold blade between 
his shoulders, there came a sudden scurry of hoofs, and the black man yelled 
with terror and ran for his life through the heather. A married woman grabs at 
her baby; an unmarried one reaches for her jewel-box. 

"How to get rid of our excessive carbon dioxide without unduly wasting our 
oxygen is a delicate and vital question," said Challenger, looking round him 
after the five iron tubes had been laid side by side against the wall. About a 
week ago--it was the Tuesday of last week--I found on one of the window-sills a 
number of absurd little dancing figures like these upon the paper. On rising at 
seven, one of the maids noticed that the door of the hut was open, but so great 
was the terror which the man caused that it was midday before anyone would 
venture down to see what had become of him. That the germs of it could hardly 
have survived the original roasting was, he declared, fairly certain. Holmes, 
and I have never seen or heard anything since then to throw any light upon what 
became of him. It was just who would get his evidence first. No, my dear 
fellow, I don't think you can help me. Here--here"--and he beat his great head 
with his huge, hairy fist--"there is something which uses matter, but is not of 
it--something which might destroy death, but which death can never destroy. " 

"Talkin' of death," said Lord John. You will come round with us to the station, 
Mr. " 

"It was an hour's good drive. "Why, man, you are no chicken, yet I warrant him 
the stronger man. It is that big body of thine that I am after. I should want 
to inspect the letters, of course. " 

"The same here. She stood at the gate, gazing after him until he vanished from 
her sight. I want one boy to be at Mordecai Smith's landing-stage opposite 
Millbank to say if the boat comes back. To this day she declares that I told 
her one moving anecdote as to how a musket looked into my tent at the dead of 
night, and how I fired a double-barrelled tiger cub at it. But now----" He 
shrugged his shoulders in humorous deprecation of the state of things which he 
had himself done so much to produce. One of them, a little, dark-bearded, 
resolute fellow, put the thoughts of himself and comrades into words as the 
ex-prisoners passed him. In an instant Beppo, a skilful workman, made a small 
hole in the wet plaster, dropped in the pearl, and with a few touches covered 
over the aperture once more. That one dint in the short, green grass was the 
only material witness left of this inexplicable nocturnal flight. " 

"For example?" asked Summerlee, with a sneer; but Lord John hastened to change 
the conversation. When a woman thinks that her house is on fire, her instinct 
is at once to rush to the thing which she values most. His two brothers and his 
sister were seated round the table exactly as he had left them, the cards still 
spread in front of them and the candles burned down to their sockets. Then, 
unable to settle down to reading, I walked slowly round the room, examining the 
pictures of celebrated criminals with which every wall was adorned. She must 
have heard of the business the day before, since all Croydon was ringing with 
it, and she alone could have understood for whom the packet was meant. Her 
sufferings were physical as well as mental, for over one eye rose a hideous, 
plum-coloured swelling, which her maid, a tall, austere woman, was bathing 
assiduously with vinegar and water. 

"Alas! alas!" he cried, all unnerved at the sight, "why is it that you are so 
sad, lady?" 

"It is the sight of these brave men," she answered; "and to think how many of 
them go and how few are like to find their way back. "  He spoke slowly, and 
there was a vibration of feeling in his sonorous voice. "I must compliment you, 
Mr. " 

"Suppose we go down-stream a short way and lie in wait for them," said Jones, 
eagerly. 

"It was a joke, my good sir--a practical joke, nothing more," he whined 
incessantly. The table was set out ready for me, and Mr. I fear that it has 
given my colleague, Professor Summerlee, occasion to blaspheme. If there were a 
high tree near the edge of the plateau we might drop a return bridge across, 
but there is none within fifty yards. " 

"Well, he drew up his own death warrant at the same time," said Lestrade. I 
suppose you might say she was handsome. When I was watching Stapleton, 
Cartwright was frequently watching you, so that I was able to keep my hand upon 
all the strings. Darkness had fallen, and a keen blizzard was blowing so that 
the streets were nearly deserted; but a few loiterers followed the group, and 
emboldened by invisibility shouted imprecations at the prisoner. 

"Lynch the cursed Scowrer!" they cried. "You have been in Afghanistan, I 
perceive. " 

"It is in my thoughts," said Black Simon, still pensively grinding his sword, 
"that we may have need of your strings ere sundown. "Come, Watson, for we have 
a good day's work before us in town. " 

"There's one thing," said I, as we walked down to the station. "I am on the 
trail of my life now, Mr. Gregson or Mr. I stared in silence at Sherlock 
Holmes, whose lips were compressed and his brows drawn down over his eyes. " 

"On the contrary," answered the Colonel, warmly, "I consider it the greatest 
privilege to have been permitted to study your methods of working. But how in 
the world did you know that he was in the house at all?" 

"The thumb-mark, Lestrade. I had understood that every paper in the United 
States was writing about it. " 

She had turned a dreadful colour, the more ghastly under the dark dust-streaks 
upon her face. Your instinct is always to do something energetic. " 

"By my hilt!" said Aylward, "if I am to preach on bowmanship, the whole long 
day would scarce give me time for my sermon. "You cunning, cunning fiend!" was 
all that he could say. I should prefer that you do not mention my name at all 
in connection with the case, as I choose to be only associated with those 
crimes which present some difficulty in their solution. Turner's lodge-keeper, 
his house being the nearest, to ask for assistance. I saw no one near my father 
when I returned, and I have no idea how he came by his injuries. " He examined 
the carpet and the window. Trevelyan's, who has, for his own purposes, been in 
Blessington's rooms?" 

I saw in the gaslight that Holmes wore an amused smile at this brilliant 
departure of mine. 

"My dear fellow," said he, "it was one of the first solutions which occurred to 
me, but I was soon able to corroborate the doctor's tale. Round this clearing 
there was a semi-circle of trees with curious huts built of foliage piled one 
above the other among the branches. "Fly, my lady, fly!" he screeched, and 
whizzed past them like bolt from bow; while close behind came lumbering a huge 
black bear, with red tongue lolling from his mouth, and a broken chain jangling 
behind him. " 

"Nay, let him come!" cried Alleyne. " 

My companion flushed up with pleasure at my words, and the earnest way in which 
I uttered them. But how about the foresight and the moral retrogression?" 

Sherlock Holmes laughed. " 

"There is one other point," said Inspector MacDonald. " 

"But that is the very thing which you have so often cautioned me not to do. He 
knew that city well and had worked there. It was a tall order, that; but as the 
bridge was up there was no other way. My mind had been too much excited by all 
that had occurred, and the strangest fancies and surmises crowded into it. She 
followed me, however, before I could close the door. " 

"This matter, from what you say, seems to have been a shock to her also. "Hi, 
Dame Eliza, bring a stoup of your best to Will to clear his throat. Go forward 
with thy song, and if our girl-faced clerk does not love it he can take to the 
road and go whence he came. Above all, never let them get you prisoner while 
there is a cartridge left--that's my last word to you, young fellah. If the 
human race must die to-day, it was at least upon a glorious death-bed. " 

Alleyne sat down willingly as directed with two great bundles on either side of 
him which contained the strollers' dresses--doublets of flame-colored silk and 
girdles of leather, spangled with brass and tin. Besides, when ye talk of 
taking me to France, ye do not conceive how useless I should be to you, seeing 
that neither by training nor by nature am I fitted for the wars, and there 
seems to be nought but strife in those parts. ' 

"'On your head be it, Alice!' cried her mother; and then, turning to me, 'I 
will tell you all, sir. Consider what the Ritual says: How does it run? "Whose 
was it?" "His who is gone. " That was after the execution of Charles. Their 
comrades crouched beneath the bulwarks, with many a rough jest and many a scrap 
of criticism or advice. The most that we could do was to check their progress 
by distracting their attention with the flash and roar of our guns, and so to 
give both the natives and ourselves time to reach the steps which led to 
safety. I can only say that it seemed to be larger than a cow and had the 
strangest musky odor. " 

"And was this wooden-legged man alone?" 

"Couldn't say, I am sure, sir. Lucas opened it. Pringle, an elderly 
housekeeper, and of Mitton, his valet. The former retires early and sleeps at 
the top of the house. Holmes crouched down behind the screen of laurels, and we 
all three followed his example. There he scribbled a short note for Stanley 
Hopkins, and left it with the lodge-keeper. " 

"The besiegers!" cried Alleyne, Ford, and Sir Nigel, all three in a breath. I 
have no doubt--" 

He stopped suddenly and stared fixedly up over my head into the air. Our route 
was certainly a singular one. At his advice, on the afternoon of the 4th we set 
off together, with the intention of crossing the hills and spending the night 
at the hamlet of Rosenlaui. A moment later the servants' door was opened, and 
Mr. 

"Winwood Reade is good upon the subject," said Holmes. Holmes, have you solved 
this mystery yet?" He shoved the large tin of cigarettes which stood on a table 
beside him towards my companion. " 

"In that case, your Grace, since you have yourself stated that any unhappiness 
in your married life was caused by his presence I would suggest that you make 
such amends as you can to the Duchess, and that you try to resume those 
relations which have been so unhappily interrupted. I protest in advance 
against any such outrageous invasion of my private life. Challenger fell, and 
as I stooped to pick him up I was again struck from behind and dropped on the 
top of him. 

"Of course," said he,  with his clumsy and ponderous sarcasm, "Professor 
Summerlee will understand that when I speak of a pterodactyl I mean a 
stork--only it is the kind of stork which has no feathers, a leathery skin, 
membranous wings, and teeth in its jaws. Barrymore exactly as directed. A 
stranger then is still dogging us, just as a stranger dogged us in London. He 
had returned with the prize, but had left a fragment in the grasp of his 
opponent. We will go to the gate and share the watch with Mahomet Singh. 

And then suddenly I had an idea. 

"By whom, Sir Samson the strong?" 

"By thee, Sir Balaam the false prophet. If a rod of six feet threw a shadow of 
nine, a tree of sixty-four feet would throw one of ninety-six, and the line of 
the one would of course be the line of the other. It is an open secret that the 
credit of this smart capture belongs entirely to the well-known Scotland Yard 
officials, Messrs. So Frank took my wedding-clothes and things and made a 
bundle of them, so that I should not be traced, and dropped them away somewhere 
where no one could find them. The next, redcap had fallen across the stone with 
an arrow between his ribs; and the other, struck in the leg and in the throat, 
was writhing and spluttering upon the ground. There were several bartenders in 
their shirt sleeves, hard at work mixing drinks for the loungers who fringed 
the broad, brass-trimmed counter. That carries us right on to the other block. 
Up to now it has been capricious in the places which it has attacked, but the 
difference is only a matter of a few hours, and it is like an advancing tide 
which covers one strip of sand and then another, running hither and thither in 
irregular streams, until at last it has submerged it all. 

On entering the room the clerk looked round; but, seeing no one, he continued 
to stand, his cap in his hand, examining with the greatest interest a chamber 
which was so different to any to which he was accustomed. I dressed hurriedly, 
for I knew by experience that railway cases were seldom trivial, and hastened 
downstairs. " 

The idea tickled Gregson so much that he laughed until he choked. "I have here 
in front of me these singular productions, at which one might smile, had they 
not proved themselves to be the forerunners of so terrible a tragedy. I had 
imagined you as operating from the street, where my friend, Lestrade and his 
merry men were awaiting you. I was overwhelmed by the honour and attempted, 
when he entered, to say so, but he plunged at once into business with the air 
of a man who wishes to hurry quickly through a disagreeable task. When our 
unknown had followed Baskerville home we should have had the opportunity of 
playing his own game upon himself and seeing where he made for. He opened the 
door himself, however, and greeted me with a great show of cordiality. 

"Any news?" he asked, eagerly. "I know a dog that would follow that scent to 
the world's end. But no doubt it is appreciable even in our young friend here. 
You know me as the austere man of science. How many landsmen are there who 
would drink rum when they could get these other spirits? Yes, I was certain it 
was a seaman. " 

"Not more than a mile or two off. 

"What were your plans?" he asked at last. He rose from the sofa and greeted us 
without difficulty when we entered. When he was sober he used to be fond of 
playing backgammon and draughts with me, and he would make me his 
representative both with the servants and with the tradespeople, so that by the 
time that I was sixteen I was quite master of the house. He had tied his cord 
to the hook on which the heavy lamp used to hang, and he had jumped off from 
the top of the very box that he showed us yesterday. As he approached, he 
recognized him as a Mormon named Cowper, to whom he had rendered services at 
different times. 

"And now I have to consider the motive of this singular crime. " 

"The wrong key!" 

"Dolt, fool that I am! This is the key of the castle gate; the other opens the 
keep. "He is the best marksman of all the crossbow companies and it was he who 
brought down the Constable de Bourbon at Brignais. " 

"That must have saved them trouble," said Holmes, thoughtfully. " 

"Then how many are there?" 

"How many? I don't know. By the way, I've got a small job for you, if you'll 
help me. ' 

"This took my breath away. 'You can hardly expect us to exert ourselves to find 
another such opening for you. But I tell you now that if it is anything against 
the safety of the fort I will have no truck with it, so you can drive home your 
knife and welcome. " 

"It is our pride," the prince answered coldly, "that we rule over freemen and 
not slaves. " 

"In that case the waiter must have placed it there while we were lunching. John 
Clay," said Holmes. 

"There is the smoke from Bazas, on the further side of Garonne," quoth he. 
"Why, I don't see that we have any clue at all. 'Beware! Beware!  Beware!' 
How's that, Watson? 

"I believe you have hit it. " 

"Not a doubt of it. Behold the link with Brother Mycroft!" 

"He left Woolwich suddenly on Monday night. " 

"But how did you get to work again?" 

"Ah, I have often marvelled at it myself. 

"Oh, you think so?" 

"Don't you?" 

"Well, it is quite possible, but the case is not clear to me yet. "He is 
looking up at the numbers of the houses. His dangerous correspondence has been 
destroyed or removed. It is a name to which I am prepared always to lift my 
hat. They laid me on a couch, I motioned for air, they were compelled to open 
the window, and you had your chance. 

As they reached the bottom of the stairs he had seen Mrs. Surely I hear those 
brutes still howling upon our track. " 

"I will not go to Dax," the other shouted. Holmes, she could not have 
guessed--nor could anyone have guessed. There was one wing, however, which 
appeared not to be inhabited at all. If on that forbidding moor a difficult and 
dangerous quest should lie before us, this was at least a comrade for whom one 
might venture to take a risk with the certainty that he would bravely share it. 
I must see this letter. What think you of my plan, Sir Simon?" 

"By my troth! I think very well of it," cried the prudent old commander. " 

The Prime Minister rose from the settee. It ended at the paving of asphalt 
which led up to the gates of the Mapleton stables. For half an hour we worked, 
the sweat dropping from our faces, our arms and backs aching with the exertion. 
He made his escape, and for some reason thought that he could do so more safely 
on foot than on the bicycle. His whole life appears to be spent in an 
alternation between savage fits of passion and gloomy intervals of sulking. I 
thought that a few months among the distractions of town would send him back a 
new man. What chance have you against a dozen of them, with Boss McGinty and 
all the power of the lodge behind them?" 

McMurdo disengaged her hands, kissed her, and gently pushed her back into a 
chair. "I propose to make a little investigation of my own to-night, and it is 
just possible that it may contribute something to the common cause. You don't 
mind the smell of strong tobacco, I hope?" 

"I always smoke 'ship's' myself," I answered. What did you do, then? You made 
some small job in my lady's room--you and your confederate Cusack--and you 
managed that he should be the man sent for. Holmes. 

"Well, well!  What next?" said he. "Do come! I am at my wit's end. " 

"Then on guard again!" cried the young squire, and sprang in with a fire and a 
fury which more than made up for the shortness of his weapon. You would not 
think it, to look at them. Do not bring police. We shall engage to get aboard 
her by night, and if you will drop us on any part of the Indian coast you will 
have done your part of the bargain. We know that while with the right hand he 
takes our fifty thousand crowns for the holding of the passes open, he hath his 
left outstretched to Henry of Trastamare, or to the King of France, all ready 
to take as many more for the keeping them closed. 

It is indeed, a fearful place. "I've a cab at the door, and it won't take us 
twenty minutes to Victoria. " 

"What should I know about that?" 

"That's what I want to ascertain. The statesman received us with that 
old-fashioned courtesy for which he is remarkable, and seated us on the two 
luxuriant lounges on either side of the fireplace. The first struck Felton on 
the target with such force as to split it from side to side, but Sir William's 
lance crashed through the camail which shielded the Spaniard's throat, and he 
fell, screaming hoarsely, to the ground. Holmes tossed them all impatiently 
aside. I had smoked two cigarettes before he moved. " 

"Please God, you will see them all back ere another year be out," said he. It 
was familiar ground to me, and I needed no guiding as we ascended the bleak 
stone staircase and made our way down the long corridor with its vista of 
whitewashed wall and dun-coloured doors. " 

It was evening before I left Camberwell, and quite dark by the time I reached 
home. Now, Mr. It might be 'sever,' or 'lever,' or 'never. " 

Accordingly, in spite of many grumbles and remonstrances from Summerlee, I 
ordered an additional tube, which was placed with the other in his motor-car, 
for he had offered me a lift to Victoria. " 

"Nothing more that you can remember?" 

"No, sir; nothing. There was the gentle rustle of a woman's dress. And there, 
in the middle of it, was the man himself--his face twisted like a lost soul in 
torment, and his great brindled beard stuck upward in his agony. " 

He dived his arm down to the bottom of the chest, and brought up a small wooden 
box with a sliding lid, such as children's toys are kept in. We bobbed and 
grinned in front of each other. The instant that I had crossed the threshold 
the door slammed heavily behind us, and I heard faintly the rattle of the 
wheels as the carriage drove away. With perfect coolness Holmes slipped across 
to the safe, filled his two arms with bundles of letters, and poured them all 
into the fire. 

The first impression which I received when I had recovered my breath was of the 
extraordinary view over the country which we had traversed. 

"What are we here for at all? I really think that you might treat us with more 
frankness. 

"Yes, sir, I have, but the shock of this disgraceful exposure has bewildered 
me. A further knowledge of facts is necessary before I would venture to give a 
final and definite opinion. "Put the pearl in the safe, Watson," said he, "and 
get out the papers of the Conk-Singleton forgery case. Good-bye, Lestrade. You 
have done something to mitigate my feelings for the loathsome profession to 
which you unhappily belong. Knock old Sherman up, and tell him, with my 
compliments, that I want Toby at once. You will bring Toby back in the cab with 
you. " 

"It is a pity there is no key, that we may make an inventory first. 

"My missing boot!" he cried. I walked into the doctor's yard this morning, and 
shot my syringe full of aniseed over the hind wheel. 

"I fear there is some dark ending to our quest," said he. "By my ten finger 
bones! when I hang bow on nail and change my brigandine for a tunic, I might do 
worse than take over the dame and her business. If ever you write an account, 
Watson, you can make rabbits serve your turn. " 

"You think then, definitely, that Barker and Mrs. "You would have done better 
to have trusted your wife. I shall certainly do as you advise. " 

"That is certainly good evidence," said Summerlee. " 

"That is my trade. Why did you pass these other chairs?" 

"I don't know, sir, it didn't matter to me where I sat. " 

"Thou foolish old John!" quoth Aylward. " 

"You are surely joking, Mr. He was a man of great size, clad in black armor 
without blazonry or ornament of any kind, for all worldly display was forbidden 
by the rules of the military brotherhood to which he belonged. 

"Would you wish dinner to be served at once, sir?" 

"Is it ready?" 

"In a very few minutes, sir. And yet--and yet--" he clenched his thin hands in 
a paroxysm of conviction--"I KNOW it's all wrong. Today, for example, its 
surface was broken by a very unexpected ripple, which has caused our friend 
considerable perplexity and annoyance. 

After the conversation which I have quoted about Barrymore, Sir Henry put on 
his hat and prepared to go out. " 

The man sprang from his chair and paced up and down the room in uncontrollable 
agitation. "Shillings have not been so plentiful with me as they once were," he 
remarked. "I had no doubt that the gang of roughs who assaulted me had carried 
off both my hat and the bird. It's not nearly so well done. He'll do better for 
you some of these days, I'm thinking. " 

"'"You're not going away in an unkind spirit, Hudson, I hope," said my father, 
with a tameness which made my blood boil. "You go and see him, my lad," said he 
as he took his leave. "I should like to have a look at the gentleman, and see 
if I can make anything of his little game. 

"I can give you every information," said he, "and, what is more, I can do you 
justice; and I will, too, whatever Brother Bartholomew may say. 

"Exactly, Mr. " 

"This is a strange welcome," McMurdo answered with some dignity, "for the 
Bodymaster of a lodge of Freemen to give to a stranger brother. But you do not 
yourself look upon this as likely?" 

"I do not think Flora would hurt a fly. " 

"You have lost one of your boots?" 

"My dear sir," cried Dr. I am very angry indeed, and I have been shamefully 
used. " She dropped her thick black veil over her face and glided from the 
room. " 

"It is no ordinary one. From his expression as he entered, however, I could see 
that all had gone well with him. Holmes pointed down the long tract of road 
which wound, a reddish yellow band, between the brown of the heath and the 
budding green of the woods. Several rolls of paper were within, covered with 
figures and calculations, without any note to show to what they referred. 

"By the three kings!" cried one, "here is an old dotard shrew to have so goodly 
a crutch! Use the leg that God hath given you, man, and do not bear so heavily 
upon the wench. Behind them marched six hundred Cheshire and Lancashire 
archers, bearing the badge of the Audleys, followed by the famous Lord Audley 
himself, with the four valiant squires, Dutton of Dutton, Delves of Doddington, 
Fowlehurst of Crewe, and Hawkestone of Wainehill, who had all won such glory at 
Poictiers. They paused, however, at the bridge, and, leaning their elbows upon 
the stonework, they stood looking down at their own faces in the glassy stream, 
and at the swift flash of speckled trout against the tawny gravel. " 

"I fear that Watson and I must go to London. "By my ten finger-bones! it would 
be a strange thing if we could not notch a mark at that distance. Here, Watkin 
of Sowley, Arnold, Long Williams, let us show the rogues that they have English 
bowmen to deal with. " 

"But, father," quoth Alleyne, "the holy Elisha was bald, which brought down 
upon him the revilements of the wicked children. 

"You must see that this is so, madam. Through the growing gloom there pulsed 
the red glow of the furnaces on the sides of the hills. 

Fore and aft the archers had cleared the galleys' decks, but from either side 
the rovers had poured down into the waist, where the seamen and bowmen were 
pushed back and so mingled with their foes that it was impossible for their 
comrades above to draw string to help them. "There are decidedly some points of 
interest in connection with it. "Rocks!" they yelled, stabbing into the air 
with their forefingers. "Rocks beneath our very bows!" Through the belly of a 
great black wave, not one hundred paces to the front of them, there thrust 
forth a huge jagged mass of brown stone, which spouted spray as though it were 
some crouching monster, while a dull menacing boom and roar filled the air. 

"Yare! yare!" screamed Goodwin Hawtayne, flinging himself upon the long pole 
which served as a tiller. "I feared that our talk would wake you. I saw my own 
comrades hacked to pieces at Maiwand without losing my nerve. 

Our course now ran down Nine Elms until we came to Broderick and Nelson's large 
timber-yard, just past the White Eagle tavern. MY DEAR HOLMES: My previous 
letters and telegrams have kept you pretty well up to date as to all that has 
occurred in this most God-forsaken corner of the world. " 

The little man stopped to relight his hookah and puffed thoughtfully for a few 
moments. " 

"Well, was there?" 

"Yes, sir, he wrote an answer. Windibank, your stepfather, returned to France?" 

"Mr. ' There are fourteen other characteristics, but those are the more 
obvious. 

"'You think, then, sir, that I should give the information to the 
Governor-General?' said I, quietly. I must beg you to be more explicit. The 
County Constabulary is in a scandalous state, sir, and it has not afforded me 
the protection to which I am entitled. 

All the next day they lay in a pine wood near to the town of Logrono, resting 
their horses and taking counsel as to what they should do. I was not surprised, 
therefore, on Monday night when a Mr. I assure you my cheeks flushed at the 
very thought. " 

"You will excuse me, Mr. " 

"Then it makes it the easier for me to propose that you should come away with 
me for a week to the Continent. We are dealing with a clever man, Watson. " 

"We hoped to snare a falcon," said he presently, "but we netted a carrion-crow. 
" He held down the light, and the marks of muddy boots were very visible in the 
corner. 

"I am Lord John Roxton. This villain had thought that I would be at sea before 
the news could reach me, and that I should be lost for years in Africa. Watson. 
You are in time to see a tragedy. 

"That's good enough. No one would stay a week. Sherlock Holmes would be 
complete which did not include some account of this very unusual affair. "Well, 
he wasn't altogether such an easy gentleman to describe. I'd only ask you not 
to worry Mrs. That was how he came to leave his club, and some of his darts 
too, as he tells me, which I dare say helped to put you on our track; though 
how you kept on it is more than I can tell. How is the owner going to restore 
the glories of the Baskervilles if he has not money enough to keep up the 
property? House, land, and dollars must go together. " 

"Well, well, if it was fastened the steps could have nothing to do with the 
matter. Then he stepped into the cab, and in half an hour we were back in the 
sitting-room at Baker Street. He did not pause, however, but bounded onward. 
They are all, as he remarks, very much against the son. 

As they reached the bottom of the stairs he had seen Mrs. Think ye that ye have 
heart enough to clamber down this cliff?" 

"Had we but a rope. That was grotesque enough in the outset, and yet it ended 
in a desperate attempt at robbery. Well, good-bye," he added as the train began 
to glide down the platform. But when I tell you that there is some account of 
the taking of the place by a parliamentary colonel in 1644, of the concealment 
of Charles for several days in the course of the Civil War, and finally of a 
visit there by the second George, you will admit that there are various 
associations of interest connected with this ancient house. Is it forgery, 
coining, burglary--where does the money come from?" 

"Have you ever read of Jonathan Wild?" 

"Well, the name has a familiar sound. Well, sir, let us do what we can to 
curtail this visit, which can hardly be agreeable to you, and is inexpressibly 
irksome to me. " 

We loitered the morning away in the garden. " 

"Morally, Mr. 

"His wife!" she cried. A vague pathway among the boulders led to the 
dilapidated opening which served as a door. That razor brain blunted and rusted 
with inaction. He never returned. Putting out my hand I felt several coats 
hanging from the wall, and I understood that I was in a passage. 

"And all in four years, Baron. "All you desire is a plain statement, is it 
not?" 

"And it is my duty to warn Mr. Scott Eccles that it may be used against him. 
Aloysius Garcia, of Wisteria Lodge, near Esher. Simon (the younger brother and 
sister of the bridegroom), and Lady Alicia Whittington. 

"Oh, yes, I know that I have treated you real bad and that I should have spoken 
to you before I went; but I was kind of rattled, and from the time when I saw 
Frank here again I just didn't know what I was doing or saying. Yet, by the 
goodness of heaven and the pious intercession of the valiant St. " 

There was a rustle among the bowmen, but when Sir Nigel looked up at them no 
man stood forward from his fellows, but the four lines of men stretched 
unbroken as before. 

"Nay, I shall go! I shall go!" said Alleyne hurriedly, as Hordle John began to 
slowly roll up his sleeve, and bare an arm like a leg of mutton. Already the 
first thin wisps of it were curling across the golden square of the lighted 
window. But in addition to this he impressed his comrades with the idea that 
among them all there was not one whose brain was so ready to devise a 
bloodthirsty scheme, or whose hand would be more capable of carrying it out. It 
all worked just as I thought. The moon shone on it, and it looked like a great 
shimmering ice-field, with the heads of the distant tors as rocks borne upon 
its surface. 

"If it should chance," he said, "that through the surpassing merits of the 
blessed Paul your sin-stained soul should gain a way into paradise, I trust 
that you will not forget that intercession which you have promised. He was a 
black-maned giant, bearded to the cheek-bones, and with a shock of raven hair 
which fell to his collar. Williams, who drove you to-night, was one of them. He 
was once light-weight champion of England. These papers have all been burned by 
the murderers. 

It was the body of a tall, well-made man, about forty years of age. 

"Let you have five hundred to-morrow morning. Stapleton, as I will continue to 
call him, knew that the old man's heart was weak and that a shock would kill 
him. So much he had learned from Dr. 

"Great honor has been done to us, men," cried he: "for, of all the army, the 
prince has chosen us out that we should ride onwards into the lands of Spain to 
spy upon our enemies. Holmes drew a note from his pocket, and read aloud: 

Abbey Grange, Marsham, Kent, 3:30 A. Then he dashed in wild pursuit amid the 
stream of the traffic, but the start was too great, and already the cab was out 
of sight. The sun was just grazing the top of the oak. She was of Welsh blood, 
fiery and passionate. It must have been this morning, or the mark would not 
remain clear upon the finger. "It is a question of cubic capacity," said he; "a 
man with so large a brain must have something in it. " 

Lord John had been gazing curiously at a great tree-fern which overshadowed the 
encampment. " 

"I know that well. "Come, John, come!" 

Rushing to his horse, he swung himself into the saddle, and was off down the 
road in a rolling cloud of dust as fast as his good steed could bear him. Has 
Sarah returned?" 

The lady shook her head ruefully, and the Professor laughed loudly and stroked 
his beard in his masterful fashion. "No doubt," said I; "but how do you know 
that he is anywhere upon the moor?" 

"I know it because I have seen with my own eyes the messenger who takes him his 
food. And yet," he added, his eyes softening, "I know that it is but a boy's 
mirth, with no sting in it. You'll dine with us, Lestrade, and then you are 
welcome to the sofa until it is time for us to start. Could you put me up 
to-night?" 

"With pleasure. Was it possible to exist upon a dead world?  Just as in physics 
the greater body draws to itself the lesser, would we not feel an overpowering 
attraction from that vast body of humanity which had passed into the unknown?  
How would the end come?  Would it be from a return of the poison?  Or would the 
earth be uninhabitable from the mephitic products of universal decay?  Or, 
finally, might our awful situation prey upon and unbalance our minds?  A group 
of insane folk upon a dead world! My mind was brooding upon this last dreadful 
idea when some slight noise caused me to look down upon the road beneath me. 
Wilder that he learned so extraordinary a device?" 

The Duke stood in thought for a moment, with a look of intense surprise on his 
face. " 

"But he is in his room. Crouching among the stones we stared intently at the 
silver-tipped bank in front of us. Suddenly, as the landlady's footsteps died 
away, there was the creak of a turning key, the handle revolved, and two thin 
hands darted out and lifted the tray from the chair. 

"Look there!" said he. 

"I will confess to my crime. You observed that her right glove was torn at the 
forefinger, but you did not apparently see that both glove and finger were 
stained with violet ink. Can you believe that I once had a well-deserved 
reputation in several nurseries as a farmyard imitator?  Perhaps I can help you 
to pass the time in a pleasant way. I say that these monstrous laws of yours 
will bring a curse upon the land--God will not let such wickedness endure. I 
passed round the garden without seeing anything more than random tracks, which 
I took to be the police; but when I got into the stable lane a very long and 
complex story was written in the snow in front of me. 

"Inspector Gregory, to whom the case has been committed, is an extremely 
competent officer. 

"Or more astonished, eh?" 

"Well, I must confess to it. Malone, I understand," said he. "We are to be 
companions--what? My rooms are just over the road, in the Albany. You have 
remarked more than once since I have been in the room that you had all the 
evidence which you require. You can reconstruct what occurred. I'll open the 
door for him, show him into the parlour beside the door, and leave him there 
while I get the papers. I expect you meant kindly by speaking to me like this. 
Summerlee was on guard, sitting hunched over our small fire, a quaint, angular 
figure, his rifle across his knees and his pointed, goat-like beard wagging 
with each weary nod of his head. He would be obliged if Professor Challenger 
would give the latitude and the longitude of the country in which prehistoric 
animals were to be found. 

"My uncle Elias emigrated to America when he was a young man and became a 
planter in Florida, where he was reported to have done very well. "I'll fight 
him with fists, or, if that won't satisfy him, I'll fight him any other way he 
chooses. Melas also. The inspector had lit his lantern, and by its light we 
could see the two doors, the curtain, the lamp, and the suit of Japanese mail 
as he had described them. Mycroft Holmes struggled out of his overcoat and 
subsided into an armchair. 

"A most annoying business, Sherlock," said he. " 

"'"Then maybe you remember something queer about it?" 

"'"What was that, then?" 

"'"I'd had nearly a quarter of a million, hadn't I?" 

"'"So it was said. Her dry lips could not speak the "No" which I saw rather 
than heard. They were grouped round the bier in the early hours of the morning, 
when, to their inexpressible fear and astonishment, the door was flung open, 
and a savage-looking, weather-beaten man in tattered garments strode into the 
room. For myself, I used to stand outside the gate-way, looking down on the 
broad, winding river and on the twinkling lights of the great city. You will 
kindly deposit your ash in the small Japanese tray on the bamboo table which 
stands at your left elbow. These," he pointed around, "are my other guns. The 
parallel is exact. It seemed to me that the shadows of death were drawing in 
upon us--the last of our race. I tell you straight, sir, I don't feel easy in 
my mind about it. But there are objections to that. " 

"Footprints?" 

"Footprints. THE ADVENTURE OF THE BERYL CORONET 

"Holmes," said I as I stood one morning in our bow-window looking down the 
street, "here is a madman coming along. But the creature flapped and struggled, 
and out came my sister to know what was the matter. Holmes, when, on my return 
on the Monday, I saw the same man on the same stretch of road. "They told me 
that you were fond of queer mysteries, and I don't think you can find a queerer 
one than that. Well struck, my lord! Well struck, Aylward! See to Black Simon, 
how he storms among the shipmen! But this Spade-beard is a gallant warrior. It 
was not to make them rich that we did for Achmet. Jones's well-known technical 
knowledge and his powers of minute observation have enabled him to prove 
conclusively that the miscreants could not have entered by the door or by the 
window, but must have made their way across the roof of the building, and so 
through a trap-door into a room which communicated with that in which the body 
was found. " 

"What are we to do, then?" I asked, as we landed near Millbank Penitentiary. " 

"I was only Crown Prince then. "  He drew out a copy from his inside pocket. 
Ah, Sir Oliver! you were on the blind side of me and I saw you not. "Halloa! 
Lestrade seems to have observed something of interest. Put on your hat, Watson, 
and we will stroll down together to Westminster. It ain't easy to talk when 
your lips is like leather, but I guess I'd best let you know how the cards lie. 
If there were some central peak it would be different, but it all slopes 
downwards, so far as we can see. " 

"Snapped, Sir John!" cried the prince, with an angry sparkle in his dark eyes. 
The drawn blinds and the smokeless chimneys, however, gave it a stricken look, 
as though the weight of this horror still lay heavy upon it. Watson has already 
heard of it. " 

A flush of vexation passed over her expressive face. " 

"I will soon make it clear to you," said she; "and I'd have done so before now 
if I could ha' got out from the cellar. 

"Exactly. 

At last I was alone with Gladys, and the moment of Fate had come!  All that 
evening I had felt like the soldier who awaits the signal which will send him 
on a forlorn hope; hope of victory and fear of repulse alternating in his mind. 

"By the beard of my father! but ye are whelps of the true breed. 

"Finally: 

"Monday night after nine. " 

We were fortunate in finding that Lord Holdhurst was still in his chambers in 
Downing Street, and on Holmes sending in his card we were instantly shown up. 
"Surely there is not a moment to be lost," I cried, "shall I go and order you a 
cab?" 

"I'm not sure about whether I shall go. 

"That ends it," said he. 

"Because I have never been without that feeling that something malevolent was 
watching us. I feel how wise and true were the words of Challenger when he said 
that the real tragedy would be if we were left behind when all that is noble 
and good and beautiful had passed. With these I journeyed down to Streatham and 
saw that they exactly fitted the tracks. On they rode, and on, until, at last, 
topping a ridge, they looked down upon the fateful valley. Having indicated an 
arm-chair to me and placed my refreshment near it, he handed me a long, smooth 
Havana. Looking back he saw the old man and the young girl crouching over the 
blazing fire, while the three animals stood motionless in the back-ground. 
There was something hypnotic in those terrible eyes. They shower down arrows, 
darts and great stones. I am sure that if you mentioned my name they would be 
happy to show it to you. He is small for his age, with a head which is quite 
disproportionately large. " 

"So it would seem. " 

"You are aware that he has disappeared?" 

"Ah, indeed!" There was no change of expression in the rugged features of the 
doctor. It has always bulked rather large in my estimate of the case. " 

There was a sudden rush and a scuffle, followed by the clash of iron and a cry 
of pain. "  The famous doctor strode out of our cottage in considerable 
ill-humour, and within five minutes Holmes had followed him. 

"Here is your pourpoint, Edricson," cried Norbury. Waldron was a strict 
disciplinarian with a gift of acid humor, as exemplified upon the gentleman 
with the red tie, which made it perilous to interrupt him. )  "But enough of 
this!"  (Loud and prolonged cheers. What did it amount to?  Some photographs. 
They are starving me. The major was raving about his losses. Whoever rang it 
must have come right up to the desk to do it. But why should any criminal wish 
to ring the bell? It is a most insoluble mystery. " As he spoke, we turned down 
a narrow lane and passed through a small side-door, which opened into a wing of 
the great hospital. "Do you think that a cavalier's arm is to be bought like a 
packman's ware. " 

"What then?" 

"I know why he was at the gate at that hour. " 

"Why did you beat the pavement?" 

"My dear doctor, this is a time for observation, not for talk. I don't blame 
you for not knowing this, for you are young and inexperienced, but if you wish 
to get on in your new duties you will work with me and not against me. Watson, 
but, unhappily, only in time to find that the worst had already occurred. " 

"Where?" 

"Well, everywhere. 

"They seem to have behaved abominably," said I. "The lady has never been in 
America in all her life. That is obvious from the shortness of the burnt end. 
But he is the only person in this world who can tell us exactly what happened 
in that room. Suppose a man had fired through the window, he would indeed be a 
remarkable shot who could with a revolver inflict so deadly a wound. Again, 
Park Lane is a frequented thoroughfare; there is a cab stand within a hundred 
yards of the house. Man for man, with equal weapons, they are as worthy and 
valiant men as could be found in the whole of Christendom. " 

"And the French?" asked Alleyne, to whom the archer's light gossip had all the 
relish that the words of the man of action have for the recluse. " 

The taciturn Austin saluted and withdrew. " 

"Which proves, of course, that the book was dropped after the crime was 
committed. "Now, Doctor," turning to me, "are those ordinary pills?" 

They certainly were not. Cunningham stood and saw the two men struggling just 
where we are. That was of great interest. My end is that the crime was 
committed half an hour earlier than reported; that Mrs. Circumstantial evidence 
is occasionally very convincing, as when you find a trout in the milk, to quote 
Thoreau's example. " 

"But I have heard all that you have heard. Between you and me I expect to hear 
news from you before long. He had, as you saw, the best of the first exchanges, 
but my self-respect and my reputation are concerned to fight it to a finish. 

On reaching the Manor House, the sergeant had found the drawbridge down, the 
windows lighted up, and the whole household in a state of wild confusion and 
alarm. " 

"And who are they, Sir Nigel?" 

"They are a free company, sire, and they are called the White Company. There 
was no light save in the dining-room, but Holmes caught up the lamp and left no 
corner of the house unexplored. He had always laughed at what he called my 
cock-and-bull story about the colonel, but he looked very scared and puzzled 
now that the same thing had come upon himself. What weapon would he choose? You 
would say the most silent in the world. " 

"Top on it?" 

"Yes. That's why the barrels were sawed. You've got to settle the thing right. 
Do you give him in charge, sir?" 

I relented. ' A Frenchman or Russian could not have written that. ' 

"'What do you call purely nominal?' 

"'Well, you have to be in the office, or at least in the building, the whole 
time. But what could he have to do with this old family custom of ours, and 
what does this rigmarole mean?' 

"'I don't think that we should have much difficulty in determining that,' said 
I; 'with your permission we will take the first train down to Sussex, and go a 
little more deeply into the matter upon the spot. " 

The Baron looked at his watch and gave a guttural exclamation of 
disappointment. "Many a time when the master has rolled up his sleeves I have 
noticed that very mark. I have seen old John Hawkwood, the same who has led 
half the Company into Italy, stand laughing in his beard as he heard it, until 
his plates rattled again. I can do nothing for myself. I enjoy it. Then I 
caught my breath as I read the time-honoured title of the great nobleman and 
statesman whose wife she had been. They were in the passage outside the room. 
Then they fell back from the edge, formed themselves again into line, and 
waited for the next victim. This chanced to come to Simon's ears when we were 
at Bordeaux together, and he would have it that we should ride to Cardillac 
with a good hempen cord, and give this Gourval such a scourging as he merited. 
" 

"Faugh!" cried Sir Nigel. We all gathered round him and gazed at it. " 

"I am in hopes of getting it. 

"I must say," said he, "that I think it would be a mighty poor thing to go back 
to London before I know a great deal more of this place than I do at present. 
He walked with his head sunk, his shoulders curved, and his knees bent, as one 
who strives hard to remain unseen. The scared look faded from her eyes, and her 
agitated features smoothed into their usual commonplace. There, outlined as 
black as an ebony statue on that shining background, I saw the figure of a man 
upon the tor. Do not think that it was a delusion, Holmes. "I am inclined to 
agree with you. " Had he discovered a gold mine, greater delight could not have 
shone upon his features. 

"But these glasses do puzzle me, I confess. 

"Then we shall march thither, for I would fain have you all back at Dax in time 
to be in the prince's vanguard. 427 Park Lane did little to clear up the 
problem in which I was interested. That's the charge, Lestrade. There, don't 
slop it about!  That's right. At the doorway of the Howe Street flats a man, 
muffled in a cravat and greatcoat, was leaning against the railing. 

"I heard a cab drive up," she said. 

"I have been cozened and bejaped," quoth he gruffly. It was disgraceful that he 
should speak thus of the leader who had been the source of all our fame and 
given us such an experience as no men have ever enjoyed. The question is, at 
what hour did we pass out from it?" 

"The air was very bad at daybreak," said I. 











"It's Just the very Biggest Thing in the World" 

Hardly was it shut when Mrs. He walked on tiptoe under the shadow of the wall, 
and when he reached the window he worked a long-bladed knife through the sash 
and pushed back the catch. His tall, bony figure gave promise of exceptional 
physical strength, while his great cranium and deep-set, lustrous eyes spoke no 
less clearly of the keen intelligence which twinkled out from behind his bushy 
eyebrows. 

"'"Just walk on a little way, dear," said Mrs. "Nothing has more individuality, 
save perhaps watches and bootlaces. Holmes, before we go?" 

Holmes had picked up the powerful air-gun from the floor, and was examining its 
mechanism. " 

"I have no desire to make mysteries, but it is impossible at the moment of 
action to enter into long and complex explanations. 



Four days later Holmes and I were again in the train, bound for Winchester to 
see the race for the Wessex Cup. Watson, quick, before he passes over the 
hill!" 

There he was, sure enough, a small urchin with a little bundle upon his 
shoulder, toiling slowly up the hill. Please arrange your thoughts and let me 
know, in their due sequence, exactly what those events are which have sent you 
out unbrushed and unkempt, with dress boots and waistcoat buttoned awry, in 
search of advice and assistance. " 

Our client looked down with a rueful face at his own unconventional appearance. 
"Shall I tell Brother Drebber?" 

"Pass it on to him, and from him to the others. " 

"There are many problems of disease, many strange pathological possibilities, 
in the East, Watson. Across the centre of it was lying a little cylinder of 
blue-gray paper. 



"What do you think of that?" cried the detective, with the air of a showman 
exhibiting his show. I am at a loss to know now why you did not advertise. ' 

"'What is it, then?' he gasped in astonishment. 'He has every requirement. ' 

"'Where is he now?' I asked. I should not, of course, have known him, but he 
bellowed out his name and the name of his launch. That night I was happy, for I 
had my letter, and I had not seen yet what the future would bring. Holmes, and 
I am sure that I can rely upon your discretion and that of your friend. He was 
known in the trade as Black Peter, and the name was given him, not only on 
account of his swarthy features and the colour of his huge beard, but for the 
humours which were the terror of all around him. Several of the dead man's 
possessions--notably a small case of razors--had been found in the valet's 
boxes, but he explained that they had been presents from the deceased, and the 
housekeeper was able to corroborate the story. 

"At the moment, however, we had no thought for the old chest, for our eyes were 
riveted upon that which crouched beside it. "That beast has not a white hair 
upon its body. The case has, in some respects, been not entirely devoid of 
interest. And yet she may at the present moment be in danger of her life. " 

"And how would you describe Mr. Well, Sir Henry, I am of one mind with you as 
to the advisability of your going down to Devonshire without delay. They drove 
him an hour, and then opened the door and shot him out. He had not understood, 
he said, that I was becoming attached to her, but when he saw with his own eyes 
that it was really so, and that she might be taken away from him, it gave him 
such a shock that for a time he was not responsible for what he said or did. " 

"I see. Very good, Ames. " 

"Now, Watson, make an effort, throw your mind back. " 

Half an hour later we were seated, all four, in the small sitting-room of 
Signora Lucca, listening to her remarkable narrative of those sinister events, 
the ending of which we had chanced to witness. He laughed until everything in 
the room seemed to rattle and quiver. 

Twice already in his career had Holmes helped him to attain success, his own 
sole reward being the intellectual joy of the problem. "He only comes there to 
see me, apparently, for the place is deserted up to the very hour he names. I 
am Emilia Lucca, and we are both from New York. ' 

"It was in vain to argue with him, for he was a very obstinate man. ' 

"'And what are they worth?' I asked. Holmes, and I carried the bird all the way 
to Kilburn. Of course, that is only just for the time. We will pass that. 
Somehow we gathered up a chair upon our way, and bounded on with it towards the 
street. My mouth was full of  his beard, our arms were locked, our bodies 
intertwined, and that infernal chair radiated its legs all round us. This must 
be the burrow where the stranger lurked. But never mind that. " 

"You cannot throw any new light upon the affair?" 

"I know nothing myself save what I have read or heard. "What make you, Alleyne, 
of these black lines which are drawn across the sheath?" 

"I cannot tell what they are, my fair lord. 

"Item, that between nones and vespers on the feast of James the Less the said 
brother John was observed upon the Brockenhurst road, near the spot which is 
known as Hatchett's Pond in converse with a person of the other sex, being a 
maiden of the name of Mary Sowley, the daughter of the King's verderer. Picture 
him seated upon a rock, his absurd boyish straw hat tilted on the back of his 
head, his supercilious eyes dominating us from under his drooping lids, his 
great black beard wagging as he slowly defined our present situation and our 
future movements. That is where he comes within my purview. You will admit, 
Watson, that these facts are very suggestive. " 

"A dog, I suppose. By an examination of the ground I gained the trifling 
details which I gave to that imbecile Lestrade, as to the personality of the 
criminal. Anselm! it would be an evil day if we had to bend to our master's 
servants as well as to our masters. " 

"No man is my master save the King," the woodman answered. He could only growl 
and blink and bristle. Douglas and begged her to go back. I had been away from 
England for ten years. I will endeavour, therefore, to condescend to their 
limitation and to indicate the situation by the use of a homely analogy which 
will be within the limits of the intelligence of your readers. His answers 
lingered in my mind. 

"It has been touch and go with him," said I, "but he'll live now. It ain't 
quite regular, but He won't mind that, you bet. The other mansions belonged to 
prosaic and respectable people who live far aloof from romance. Each struck 
fire from the other's shield, and each endured the jarring shock as though 
welded to the horse beneath him. Is that all clear?  Well, then, I take our 
powder--or what remains of it--from the envelope, and I lay it above the 
burning lamp. "Yes, sir, we should already be very far from our normal selves, 
and instead of sitting quietly discussing scientific problems in a railway 
train we should be showing actual symptoms of the poison which was working 
within us. They are all upon technical subjects. " 

"How do you know?" 

"Because I recognized their sentinel when I glanced out of my window. Once only 
had I known him to fail, in the case of the King of Bohemia and of the Irene 
Adler photograph; but when I looked back to the weird business of the Sign of 
Four, and the extraordinary circumstances connected with the Study in Scarlet, 
I felt that it would be a strange tangle indeed which he could not unravel. I 
may even go the length of open confession. " 

"Why didn't you tell her of her danger?" 

"Because then, again, she would have left me, and I couldn't bear to face that. 
The air had turned chill and we withdrew into the hut for warmth. But I allow 
that I can hold him till you come. Perchance it would be well that we should 
ask him whither he rides, for it may be that he is one who desires to advance 
himself in chivalry. Alleyne smiled as he wondered what fantastic and wondrous 
deed would be exacted from him. Such were these, doubtless--this golden-bearded 
man and the fair damsel with the cold, proud face. Huxtable's hearthrug. Beside 
him stood a very young man, whom I understood to be Wilder, the private 
secretary. He was very richly dressed, with furred robes, a scarlet hood, and 
wide hanging sleeves lined with flame-colored silk. He couldn't stand, far less 
help. My word, what a theme for him!  "Standing in the little gallery under the 
dome and looking down upon that packed mass of despairing humanity, groveling 
at this last instant before a Power which they had so persistently ignored, 
there rose to my ears from the swaying crowd such a low moan of entreaty and 
terror, such a shuddering cry for help to the Unknown, that----" and so forth. 
But at last he made a trip--only a little, little trip--but it was more than he 
could afford when I was so close upon him. "  (All this in little gasps, with 
terrible struggles for breath between. 

"Yes, sir, I have already read the account in the evening papers. The man's 
novel, with which he had read himself to sleep was lying upon the bed, and his 
pipe was on a chair beside him. 

"Come in!" said he. "He drove her. It is not too much to say that once or 
twice, as in that business of the Sholto murder and the Agra treasure, he has 
been more nearly correct than the official force. There was a laurel bush 
outside the window, and several of the branches bore signs of having been 
twisted or snapped. When dusk comes we should find ourselves one stage advanced 
in our investigation. Now, all these rooms are unfurnished and unoccupied so 
that his expedition became more mysterious than ever. Malone, I have given you 
rather more of my time than I had intended. But even as I do so, I am 
overwhelmed by the wonder of the fact that it should be our little group of the 
"Lost World"--Professor Challenger, Professor Summerlee, Lord John Roxton, and 
myself--who have passed through this amazing experience. I stood for five 
minutes thinking the business over, and trying to analyze my impressions. 
Challenger called out from the sofa that she was fainting. 

"Of course," said he,  with his clumsy and ponderous sarcasm, "Professor 
Summerlee will understand that when I speak of a pterodactyl I mean a 
stork--only it is the kind of stork which has no feathers, a leathery skin, 
membranous wings, and teeth in its jaws. 

"It would be robbing you of the credit of the case if I was to presume to help 
you," remarked my friend. " 

Sherlock Holmes swallowed a cup of coffee, and turned his attention to the ham 
and eggs. He was fully dressed, and had apparently already been out. All day he 
would wander about as black as thunder, and he took to drinking a deal more 
than was good for him. 

"The surgeon, Dr. "I extremely dislike altering my habits, but the powers that 
be would take no denial. You have shown your relish for it by the enthusiasm 
which has prompted you to chronicle, and, if you will excuse my saying so, 
somewhat to embellish so many of my own little adventures. Was I right?" 

Barker beat his head with his clenched fist in his impotent anger. The reapers 
were slowly trooping back to their work. He was a man of such gigantic strength 
that, even with the handcuffs which Holmes had so deftly fastened upon his 
wrists, he would have very quickly overpowered my friend had Hopkins and I not 
rushed to his rescue. There is not an instant to be lost. But look at these 
lonely houses, each in its own fields, filled for the most part with poor 
ignorant folk who know little of the law. " 

"And none whom you love?" 

"Nay, I will not say that," said Alleyne. The fame and brilliancy of the 
prince's court had drawn the knights-errant and pursuivants-of-arms from every 
part of Europe. Further back are knights from Quercy, Limousin, Saintonge, 
Poitou, and Aquitaine, with the valiant Sir Guiscard d'Angle. " 

"That is satisfactory so far as it goes," thought I. " 

"Nay," said the Earl of Angus, "it is not so certain; for the peasant with whom 
we spoke last night said that it was rumored that Don Tello, the Spanish king's 
brother, had ridden with six thousand chosen men to beat up the prince's camp. 
" 

"Oh, bless you, it doesn't matter in the least. "What is the use of having 
brains in our profession. "It will require some checking and you have little 
time to check it. Leave that rogue lying. Now stretch out in line, my merry 
ones, with arrow on string, and I shall show you such sport as only the King 
can give. " 

Alleyne stooped and kissed her, for the kiss was the common salutation of the 
age, and, as Erasmus long afterwards remarked, more used in England than in any 
other country. Pray what is your own theory as to what took place?" 

"Well, really, I came to seek a theory, not to propound one. I have given you 
all the facts. You'll find it through the length and breadth of the States, but 
always as an innocent one. We have our own ways and methods, different from 
Chicago. Then the West Section Coaling Company has paid its annual 
contribution. " 

"That what had come again?" 

"The devil, sir, for all I know. A milder or more courteous youth never came 
out of Hampshire. The boat was now somewhere south of the Suez Canal on her way 
to Australia. The nurse-girl slapped one of her charges and then began to push 
the perambulator up the hill. " 

Holmes shook his head impatiently. You wore a costume of dove-colored silk with 
ostrich-feather trimming. Among other things I bought these brown boots--gave 
six dollars for them--and had one stolen before ever I had them on my feet. " 
He laughed sonorously at his own conceit, for, though he had little sense of 
humor, the crudest pleasantry from his own lips moved him always to roars of 
appreciation. 

"Come into the house," said Holmes, in his crisp, firm way. "Quite a little 
parlour game--sort of three-card trick, is it not? There are your three men. "I 
think I shall have a pull at that flask, Holmes. If I have ever separated 
myself from the official force, it is because they have first separated 
themselves from me. I am sorry to give you such a two-edged thing, but I can't 
say what turn things are going to take. Then I stopped altogether, but he 
stopped also. 

"You're a queer card, for sure," said he. 

For answer the man waved a small brown-paper parcel triumphantly above his 
head. "He remarks that, while the individual man is an insoluble puzzle, in the 
aggregate he becomes a mathematical certainty. I fear that your man will come 
by little honor with him. 

These were the two men who entered abruptly into our little sitting-room on 
Tuesday, March the 16th, shortly after our breakfast hour, as we were smoking 
together, preparatory to our daily excursion upon the moors. I waited until he 
had passed out of sight and then I followed him. It was a simple trick, but 
exceedingly effective. Both Mr. A course between such men would have been 
enough in itself to cause the keenest interest, apart from its being the crisis 
which would decide who should be the victors of the day. 

"I cannot think," said he, "why you English should be so fond of your six-foot 
stick. As his opponent walked towards him he suddenly bounded forward and sent 
in a whistling cut which would have severed the other in twain had he not 
sprung lightly back from it. I had always vowed vengeance, and now I had my 
chance. 

"A patient!" said she. They were small men, wiry, active, and well-built, with 
lank black hair tied up in a bunch behind their heads with a leathern thong, 
and leathern also were their loin-clothes. 

Nor had they cause, as the result was to show. 

"'"I'm Jack Prendergast," said he, "and by God! You'll learn to bless my name 
before you've done with me. Sherlock Holmes, that if my friend here had not 
proposed coming round to you this morning I should have come on my own account. 

The thickset chauffeur, who had seated himself by the table, pushed forward his 
glass with some eagerness. 

"I am Miss Morstan, and these two gentlemen are my friends," said she. "Your 
servant, gentlemen. " 

"You'll see your pal again presently," said Jones. 

"Indeed, gentlemen, you had best go," said mine host. 

"Come, sir," said he. It appeared to be somewhat too heavy for his strength, 
for in lowering it, it came down on the ground with some little violence. The 
deeds of black Agnes of Dunbar, of Lady Salisbury and of the Countess of 
Montfort, were still fresh in the public minds. Had he done well to say so 
much, or had he not done better to have said more? What would the knight have 
said had he confessed to his love for the Lady Maude? Would he cast him off in 
disgrace, or might he chide him as having abused the shelter of his roof? It 
had been ready upon his tongue to tell him all when Sir Oliver had broken in 
upon them. " 

I could have struck the man across the face, so hot was I at this callous and 
off-hand reference to so delicate a matter. 

The end of the world!  One had often heard the words, but the idea that they 
could ever have an immediate practical significance, that it should not be at 
some vague date, but now, to-day, that was a tremendous, a staggering thought. 
"The brutes mean mischief. " 

The moment we attempted to retreat the circle closed in upon us, until the tips 
of the wings of those nearest to us nearly touched our faces. 

"The insolent villain!" cried Pedro, glaring furiously after him. "It is of 
importance that it should not rain before we are able to go over the ground. 
Listen to this: 'Lost, on the 9th inst. Holmes. 

"I am glad to stretch myself, Watson," said he. " 

"Here you are, doggy!  Good old Toby!  Smell it, Toby, smell it!" He pushed the 
creasote handkerchief under the dog's nose, while the creature stood with its 
fluffy legs separated, and with a most comical cock to its head, like a 
connoisseur sniffing the bouquet of a famous vintage. 

"So far I could hardly have gone astray. In it lay some table linen and a large 
corkscrew. It had taken me an hour to come down. " 

"No, no; it is, it is his very own writing!" 

"Very well. King, the cook. You said, Mrs. So long as the law does not find 
some other victim you are safe from me. And yet the idea struck a chill to the 
most reckless of them. I have a box for 'Les Huguenots. I think, Watson, that 
it would be as well for you to have your pistol ready. 

"It is very rough, of course, and it only deals with the points which seem to 
me to be essential. "It's enough to scare any man. I'll have a row of electric 
lamps up here inside of six months, and you won't know it again, with a 
thousand candle-power Swan and Edison right here in front of the hall door. The 
villain Sholto went off to India, but he never came back again. Speaking 
roughly, T, A, O, I, N, S, H, R, D, and L are the numerical order in which 
letters occur, but T, A, O, and I are very nearly abreast of each other, and it 
would be an endless task to try each combination until a meaning was arrived 
at. I therefore waited for fresh material. Woodley since. He was for ever 
making eyes at me--a coarse, puffy-faced, red-moustached young man, with his 
hair plastered down on each side of his forehead. " 

"Indeed! That is interesting," said Holmes. Sherlock Holmes?" 

The cabman scratched his head. Would you mind coming over and speaking to Mrs. 
" 

"My imitation of the clucking hen who had just laid an egg was also considered 
rather above the average. Only one important thing has happened in the last 
three days, and that is that nothing has happened. The Indians now could only 
shake their heads and shrug their shoulders when we expressed by signs our 
desire to descend. At least a dozen, by their grimed faces and the safety 
lanterns which they carried, proclaimed themselves miners. 

Down the slanting road there was riding a big, burly man, clad in a tunic of 
purple velvet and driving a great black horse as hard as it could gallop. "Now 
that I do know it I shall do my best to forget it. 

The banker's dressing-room was a plainly furnished little chamber, with a grey 
carpet, a large bureau, and a long mirror. "Wine for the lady, squire! The 
blessed hour of sight hath passed. " 









It was late ere Alleyne Edricson, having carried Sir Nigel the goblet of spiced 
wine which it was his custom to drink after the curling of his hair, was able 
at last to seek his chamber. 

"Halloa, Beryl!" said he, and it seemed to me that the tone of his greeting was 
not altogether a cordial one. Here is a quotation from Eckermann's Voodooism 
and the Negroid Religions: 

"'The true voodoo-worshipper attempts nothing of importance without certain 
sacrifices which are intended to propitiate his unclean gods. Here too were the 
beautiful brunettes of the Gironde, with eyes which out-flashed their jewels, 
while beside them rode their blonde sisters of England, clear cut and aquiline, 
swathed in swans'-down and in ermine, for the air was biting though the sun was 
bright. 

Holmes took a paper from his pocket and laid a ten-pound note upon the table. 
'Who talks of murdering a mad dog? What mercy had you upon my poor darling, 
when you dragged her from her slaughtered father, and bore her away to your 
accursed and shameless harem. ' 

"'It was not I who killed her father,' he cried. 'By the inscription I observed 
that you had not had it more than a year. ' 

"He looked surprised and, as it seemed to me, a little startled at my remark. 

"'What on earth for?' I asked. By profession I am a hydraulic engineer, and I 
have had considerable experience of my work during the seven years that I was 
apprenticed to Venner & Matheson, the well-known firm, of Greenwich. 

"The rest, gentlemen, you know for yourselves. 

"By our Lady of Rocamadour!" cried the Lord of Mucident, "this is more than I 
can abide. 'Punishment has been slow in coming, but it has overtaken you at 
last. ' I saw his coward lips tremble as I spoke. ' 

"'How far from the body?' 

"'A dozen yards or so. Yet it is evidently a document of importance. At last 
the violet rim of the German Ocean appeared over the green edge of the Norfolk 
coast, and the driver pointed with his whip to two old brick and timber gables 
which projected from a grove of trees. There were steps in the passage. He 
forgot his gloves but he caught up his shoes and darted into the bedroom. He 
came here with his victim in a four-wheeled cab, which was drawn by a horse 
with three old shoes and one new one on his off fore leg. What do you make of 
it, Watson?" 

"A cipher message, Holmes. Of course it is locked at night. Each fact is 
suggestive in itself. The man must value the pipe highly when he prefers to 
patch it up rather than buy a new one with the same money. It was a straight 
left against a slogging ruffian. It stole slowly round the camp, and then 
halted near our gateway. Oberstein lived there with a single valet, who was 
probably a confederate entirely in his confidence. He always carried it with 
him. It was a nightmare, the grey, dusty church, the rows of agonized figures, 
the dimness and silence of it all. A reference to the passenger list showed 
that Miss Fraser, of Adelaide, with her maid had made the voyage in her. 

"That's his bedroom," Holmes whispered. Mortimer Tregennis died during the 
night, and with exactly the same symptoms as the rest of his family. You say 
that before Sir Charles Baskerville's death several people saw this apparition 
upon the moor?" 

"Three people did. " 

"And the one beyond, which shines so brightly?" 

"That is certainly the dining-room. The taper was still on the table, and by 
its light I glanced to see what the paper was which Brunton had taken from the 
bureau. 

"Anything fresh, Sergeant Wilson?" asked White Mason. Even Stapleton's attempt 
upon Sir Henry that night which ended in the death of the unfortunate convict 
did not help us much in proving murder against our man. 

"'I beg that you will state your business, sir,' said I; 'my time is of value. 
"A lot of people have accounts to settle with him. It IS impossible as I state 
it, and therefore I must in some respect have stated it wrong. Now, presuming 
that the source of the crime is as we suspect it to be, there might be two 
different motives. 'You are the very man for us. I've always been on my guard 
since then, though I have no idea how you know it. I don't want to be 
remembered as a common cut-throat. Andrew; for if you forget the blessed when 
things are well with you, they are very likely to forget you when you have need 
of them. I have a score of one hundred and nineteen pounds of wax against the 
holy Andrew, and, as he was a very just man, I doubt not that I shall have full 
weigh and measure when I have most need of it. " 

"Where?" 

"Ah, there we come to the edge of the unexplored. " 

"Not a bit, Doctor. Would you please remain in the room? Stand over there near 
the bedroom door. I should be delighted to look into any problem which you 
might submit to me. There are times, young fellah, when every one of us must 
make a stand for human right and justice, or you never feel clean again. 
Neville St. Clair and swore that the presence of the clothes in his room was as 
much a mystery to him as to the police. There was no sign of him there. This 
must have been well known to the robbers, or they would not have acted as they 
did. " 

I looked at the mark to which his finger pointed, and I gave a sudden cry of 
joy. "But if I am to go, I must pack at once, for I have only half an hour. " 

"And why less noise, young Solomon?" 

"Ah, that is for your wit to discover. Now I'll get down to the lodge, and 
we'll soon make old man Pinkerton sorry for himself. So! Here we are at last in 
safety. They were half-way across the bailey ere the frantic, howling peasants 
made a movement to stop them. He bade me say to you that the Lord Loring will 
not need your service to-night, as he sleeps with the Lord Chandos. If you will 
have the kindness to hold the lamp for me, we shall now extend our researches 
to the room above,--the secret room in which the treasure was found. " 

"What became of him?" 

"He seems to have broken through the shrubbery and made for the road. "Hast had 
small experience of war, if I may judge by your looks and bearing. " 

"I would fain to France with my friends here," Alleyne answered; "but I am a 
man of peace--a reader, exorcist, acolyte, and clerk. " 

"If he waits a little longer he will get no price at all. By good fortune, the 
wood was so light and rotten that it went to a thousand splinters, but Alleyne 
thought it best to leave the twain to settle the matter at their leisure, the 
more so as the sun was shining brightly once more. " 

"But, Aylward, think of the men whom I saw yesternight," said Alleyne. "But 
what do you allow that we should do about it?" 

"Why not go right down now and fix him?" someone suggested. " 

The Mayor of Lepe gazed with amazement on the mild face and slender frame of 
the famous warrior. 

The young fellow seemed pleased at the suggestion, and his dark eyes sparkled 
with pleasure. There was no truth, Mr. Some years ago, however, when she 
resided at Penge, she let apartments in her house to three young medical 
students, whom she was obliged to get rid of on account of their noisy and 
irregular habits. But there are curious and suggestive details about the case, 
Watson. Holmes has already been taken into your confidence, it would indeed be 
absurd that we should not avail ourselves of his services. He would take so 
valuable a prize to headquarters with his own hands. He came here with his 
victim in a four-wheeled cab, which was drawn by a horse with three old shoes 
and one new one on his off fore leg. Putting out my hand I felt several coats 
hanging from the wall, and I understood that I was in a passage. 

"Well, really!" he cried, and then he choked and laughed again until he was 
obliged to lie back, limp and helpless, in the chair. " 

"What reparation can I make?" 

"Where is Oberstein with the papers?" 

"I do not know. You remember that terrible murderer, Bert Stevens, who wanted 
us to get him off in '87? Was there ever a more mild-mannered, Sunday-school 
young man?" 

"It is true. " 

"Whom would you recommend, then?" 

Holmes laid his hand upon my arm. Watson," cried the woman in a pleading voice. 
" 

"I never saw a Devonshire man who did not swear by his county," I remarked. 
They came more rapidly than before--so rapid that it was hard to follow them. 
But no heroes, returning from a forlorn hope, could have had a warmer welcome 
from their comrades. Things are quiet, so friend Challenger sees a chance to 
set the public talking about him. Agents were suspected or even caught, but 
there was evidence of some strong and secret central force. It was absolutely 
necessary to expose it. 

"That is Jacobson's Yard," said Holmes, pointing to a bristle of masts and 
rigging on the Surrey side. "You have already imperilled the whole success of 
our expedition. But in calling Moriarty a criminal you are uttering libel in 
the eyes of the law--and there lie the glory and the wonder of it! The greatest 
schemer of all time, the organizer of every deviltry, the controlling brain of 
the underworld, a brain which might have made or marred the destiny of 
nations--that's the man! But so aloof is he from general suspicion, so immune 
from criticism, so admirable in his management and self-effacement, that for 
those very words that you have uttered he could hale you to a court and emerge 
with your year's pension as a solatium for his wounded character. I wish to be 
perfectly frank with you, Mrs. I am inclined now to have a little amusement at 
his expense. "  Muttering and mumbling, he came rolling after me like an angry 
and rather ill-conditioned mastiff. Holmes. 

"If you were to search all England," said he, "I don't suppose you could find a 
household more self-contained or freer from outside influences. He then 
proceeded down the alley, and 

it was at the far end of it that his body was discovered. Forfeit, my good Mr. 
Malone, I claim forfeit!  You have played a rather dangerous game, and it 
strikes me that you have lost it. 

I thanked him. As far as the eye can reach stretches the great flat plain-land, 
all dusted over with patches of alkali, and intersected by clumps of the 
dwarfish chaparral bushes. 

It was no easy or light thing to journey through this great forest, which was 
some twenty miles from east to west and a good sixteen from Bramshaw Woods in 
the north to Lymington in the south. No footmarks were to be found on the path. 
Wonderful! Wonderful! Do you carry the names of all the gun makers in the world 
in your memory?" 

Holmes dismissed the subject with a wave. 

"No doubt it is an American shotgun," White Mason continued. Holmes put his 
finger on his lips, replaced his hand in his breast pocket, and burst out 
laughing as we turned down the street. The Randall gang were arrested in New 
York this morning. We were to fix it all two nights later. 

"Are you the parties who come with Miss Morstan?" he asked. Welcome to 
Aquitaine, Sir Nigel Loring and Sir Oliver Buttesthorn. Nay, keep your knee for 
my sweet father at Windsor. " 

"Thought more of mine own home?" cried Sir Nigel. You remember that last night, 
when I came through that door, I begged and prayed you for mercy, and you 
laughed in my face as you are trying to laugh now, only your coward heart 
cannot keep your lips from twitching. " 

We did indeed get a fleeting view of a stretch of the Thames with the lamps 
shining upon the broad, silent water; but our cab dashed on, and was soon 
involved in a labyrinth of streets upon the other side. " 

"Then, how can I assist you?" 

"By advising me as to what I should do with Sir Henry Baskerville, who arrives 
at Waterloo Station"--Dr. In a quarter of an hour, we shall be at your service. 
In the country there was draining and hedging, planting and clearing, until the 
next summer saw the whole country golden with the wheat crop. 

"It's all clear," he whispered. I ought to know its size and shape, seeing that 
I have read the advertisement about it in The Times every day lately. You saw 
the things I had with me at yonder hostel: name which you will, save only the 
box of rose-colored sugar which I take to the Lady Loring, and you shall have 
it if you will but come with me to France. Of course a match could not have 
done that. Armstrong is at present of interest to us, but, now that I find he 
keeps so keen a look-out upon anyone who may follow him on these excursions, 
the affair appears more important, and I shall not be satisfied until I have 
made the matter clear. 

"So, gentlemen," said he, "you have attained your end and have certainly chosen 
a particularly delicate moment for your intrusion. Every detail which I had 
roughly noted from my watch-tower was drawn out in its relative place. By 
degrees Mr. James Windibank running at the top of his speed down the road. " 

Together we stole down to the road and crept across to the door of the inn. " 

"Nor for the honor of Scotland either," cried the Earl of Angus. 

"Far be it from me," said Sir Claude Latour suavely, "to persuade you against 
this worthy archer, or against Sir Nigel Loring; yet we have been together in 
many ventures, and perchance it may not be amiss if I say to you what I think 
upon the matter. Waldron," he said, "to cease to make assertions which are not 
in strict accordance with scientific fact. " 

The words unloosed a tempest. 

"Look here," he said at last, striding up to them, "when my daughter summons 
you, you can come, but until then I don't want to see your faces again. We will 
drive in to Coombe Tracey, but Watson will leave his things as a pledge that he 
will come back to you. What he sought was evidently not there, for again we saw 
the flash through another blind, and then through another. 

"No, no. 

That morning we mapped out a small portion of the plateau, avoiding the swamp 
of the pterodactyls, and keeping to the east of our brook instead of to the 
west. 

"'Not know?' 

"'No; he has a latch-key, and he let himself in. "All things are possible to 
God, but, certes, without a miracle, I should scarce expect to find the soul of 
Roger Clubfoot amongst the just. Dr. Mortimer turned the manuscript to the 
light and read in a high, cracking voice the following curious, old-world 
narrative: 



"Of the origin of the Hound of the Baskervilles there 

have been many statements, yet as I come in a direct 

line from Hugo Baskerville, and as I had the story from 

my father, who also had it from his, I have set it down 

with all belief that it occurred even as is here set 

forth. " 

"He being the heir?" 

"Yes. Lucas opened it. I followed him into his room, leaving the hall door ajar 
behind me, for I feared to be alone with the man. " 

"And so you shall, mon petit," replied the archer. We have boxed the compass 
among us. We were given a suit of sailor togs each, a barrel of water, two 
casks, one of junk and one of biscuits, and a compass. 

We had little time to watch them, however, for in an instant they had overtaken 
the fugitives and were making a dire slaughter among them. 

There is no reason whatever to suspect foul play, or to 

imagine that death could be from any but natural causes. 

"Nor is there an end of mine," remarked Challenger, "for science is not dead, 
and this catastrophe in itself will offer us many most absorbing problems for 
investigation. An extraordinary change had come over his face. The thick, warm 
air of the conservatory and the rich, choking fragrance of exotic plants took 
us by the throat. 

"See the value of imagination," said Holmes. 'When you bared your arm to draw 
that fish into the boat I saw that J. A. 'Up with them! up with them!' cried a 
hundred voices. In a moment four figures shot up above the crowd. " 

Mr. " 

"Well, now, in considering this case there are two points about young 
McCarthy's narrative which struck us both instantly, although they impressed me 
in his favour and you against him. We all gathered round him and gazed at it. 
Simple as the case is, there have been one or two very instructive details in 
connection with it. Just pull up at a telegraph office as you pass, cabby. The 
cottage had been standing empty this eight months, and it was a pity, for it 
was a pretty two-storied place, with an old-fashioned porch and honeysuckle 
about it. On another occasion an old white-haired gentleman had an interview 
with my companion; and on another a railway porter in his velveteen uniform. 

"Who is there?" cried a gruff voice from within. I was surprised, therefore, 
when, one morning in June, as I sat reading the British Medical Journal after 
breakfast, I heard a ring at the bell, followed by the high, somewhat strident 
tones of my old companion's voice. ' 

"I assured him that I was not offended. On the one hand, I was definitely 
engaged and had a hundred pounds in my pocket; on the other, the look of the 
offices, the absence of name on the wall, and other of the points which would 
strike a business man had left a bad impression as to the position of my 
employers. 

"There's someone in here," cried Lestrade. My work there is but half finished. 

"I very well remember the sensation which was caused by the disappearance of 
Captain Morstan. At night he flung himself down among the rocks, and snatched a 
few hours of sleep; but before daybreak he was always well on his way. 



What of the cord? 

The cord was made in England: 

A rough cord, a tough cord, 

A cord that bowmen love; 

So we'll drain our jacks 

To the English flax 

And the land where the hemp was wove. I may have to go down to Horsham, after 
all. He had, as it appears, been returning from Fareham in the twilight, and as 
the country was unknown to him, and the chalk-pit unfenced, the jury had no 
hesitation in bringing in a verdict of 'death from accidental causes. To his 
right walked a huge red-headed man, with broad smile and merry twinkle, whose 
clothes seemed to be bursting and splitting at every seam, as though he were 
some lusty chick who was breaking bravely from his shell. Hordle John caught up 
the Lady Loring as though she had been a feather, and sprang with her into an 
open porch; while Aylward, with a whirl of French oaths, plucked at his quiver 
and tried to unsling his bow. The other, however, though near a foot shorter, 
was a man of great strength; and there was a gloss upon his white skin which 
was wanting in the heavier limbs of the renegade monk. In old days Stamford had 
never been a particular crony of mine, but now I hailed him with enthusiasm, 
and he, in his turn, appeared to be delighted to see me. 

"Well, what do you think of that?" cried the Professor, rubbing his hands with 
an air of triumph. 

"They are not very hard to deceive," he remarked. Mac," said he. People did not 
hide in those days without excellent hiding places, and the hiding place that 
has once been used may be again. I had persuaded myself that we should find Mr. 
I have spoken of our English-speaking half-breed, Gomez--a fine worker and a 
willing fellow, but afflicted, I fancy, with the vice of curiosity, which is 
common enough among such men. His answers lingered in my mind. He spoke in a 
slow staccato fashion, choosing his words with care, and gave the impression 
generally of a man of learning and letters who had had ill-usage at the hands 
of fortune. 

"Take her up! Stay with her!" he had said to Mrs. 

"None; but very heavy rain. 

"Nothing of the sort," said the Professor, severely. 

"Fear not, my fair damsel," said Sir Nigel, "but tell me if perchance a poor 
and most unworthy knight can in any wise be of service to you. In my aching 
head the one thought was throbbing that there really was truth in this man's 
story, that it was of tremendous consequence, and that it would work up into 
inconceivable copy for the Gazette when I could obtain permission to use it. 
That servant, I found upon inquiry, was so ill that she had gone to her bed. 
The man is a striking-looking fellow, very well equipped to steal the heart of 
a country girl, so that this theory seemed to have something to support it. 
Look how the water is still oozing into that deeper print!  By Jove!  See, here 
is the mark of a little one!" 

Sure enough, smaller tracks of the same general form were running parallel to 
the large ones. It was blowing a gale of wind; but because he was announced to 
go he insisted on starting. For a moment, as I saw its shape, I hoped that it 
was an iguanodon, which I knew to be harmless, but, ignorant as I was, I soon 
saw that this was a very different creature. Then it shut off as suddenly as it 
began. I whipped up the mare and we were there under the ten minutes. " 

"Ah! that is suggestive. "There has been many a hammer murder and no trace on 
the hammer. As to poor Lestrade's discovery it was simply a blind intended to 
put the police upon a wrong track, by suggesting Socialism and secret 
societies. Looking back we saw only the dense screen of trees, but that 
long-drawn yell told us how many of our enemies lurked among them. Apparently 
the great hospitals had each sent down their contingent. The behavior of the 
audience at present was good-humored, but mischievous. The Adventure of the 
Noble Bachelor XI. But Barker's story is corroborated by Mrs. It is clearly a 
reference to the words in a page of some book. They had each been stabbed, it 
seems, and the Hungarian police were of opinion that they had quarreled and had 
inflicted mortal injuries upon each other. I swear that he might have twisted 
it off had I understood what it would mean to Garcia. It was very clear to me 
that if dangers lay before us I could not in all England have found a cooler 
head or a braver spirit with which to share them. " 

"I am not to blame, Mr. )  "Popular lecturers are in their nature parasitic. He 
would only add, before he sat down, that he rejoiced--and all of them would 
rejoice--that these gentlemen had returned safe and sound from their difficult 
and dangerous task, for it cannot be denied that any disaster to such an 
expedition would have inflicted a well-nigh irreparable loss to the cause of 
Zoological science. 

"Misfortunes never come single," said Phelps, smiling, though it was evident 
that his adventure had somewhat shaken him. "She hath a proper spirit for her 
years and cannot abide to be thwarted. It is kindly and homely to me to hear 
her voice and to feel that she is behind me. The archer was standing with 
folded arms, his bow jutting from over his shoulder, and the sun gleaming 
brightly upon his head-piece and the links of his chain-mail. The Adventure of 
the Speckled Band IX. Watson's umbrella, I was able last night to fish up and 
inspect this bundle. 











OUR prisoner's furious resistance did not apparently indicate any ferocity in 
his disposition towards ourselves, for on finding himself powerless, he smiled 
in an affable manner, and expressed his hopes that he had not hurt any of us in 
the scuffle. "Many a time have I won a gallon of ale by covering a mile in 
three flights down Wilverley Chase. I have seen old John Hawkwood, the same who 
has led half the Company into Italy, stand laughing in his beard as he heard 
it, until his plates rattled again. You will find me at the police-station. I 
will stake it all on the fact that your story is an absolute fabrication. Thus, 
when my wife came downstairs and I was impelled to slip behind the door and 
alarm her by some wild cry as she entered, I was able to stifle the impulse and 
to greet her with dignity and restraint. Sholto's death, I said nothing of the 
exact manner and method of it. The discovery was first made by Mr. Beside him 
stood his giant recruit, still clad in the home-spun and ill-fitting garments 
of the fuller of Lymington, with arms and legs shooting out of his scanty garb. 
Her rosy lips were parted, showing the regular line of snow-white teeth within, 
and a playful smile played over her infantile features. They were grouped round 
the bier in the early hours of the morning, when, to their inexpressible fear 
and astonishment, the door was flung open, and a savage-looking, weather-beaten 
man in tattered garments strode into the room. She fought her way out again. 
Why on earth, then, should any criminal send her the proofs of his guilt, 
especially as, unless she is a most consummate actress, she understands quite 
as little of the matter as we do?" 

"That is the problem which we have to solve," Holmes answered, "and for my part 
I shall set about it by presuming that my reasoning is correct, and that a 
double murder has been committed. The stream brings down the clay. Every plunge 
of the excited horse brought it against the horns again, and goaded it to fresh 
madness. They are the devil's pet baits. 

Sir Nigel was a slight man of poor stature, with soft lisping voice and gentle 
ways. He was a son of that Rodger Baskerville, the younger brother of Sir 
Charles, who fled with a sinister reputation to South America, where he was 
said to have died unmarried. I caught one glimpse of his venomous, menacing 
eyes amid the white swirl of the waters. 

"My practice has extended recently to the Continent," said Holmes, after a 
while, filling up his old brier-root pipe. "The facts appear to admit of only 
one explanation. " 

Edricson came, however, of that sturdy Saxon blood which is very slowly heated, 
but once up not easily to be cooled. He was pale and dejected, stained with 
dust, and exhausted with hunger and fatigue. He came here with his victim in a 
four-wheeled cab, which was drawn by a horse with three old shoes and one new 
one on his off fore leg. Alleyne started with astonishment as he recognized the 
very maiden who had suffered from his brother's violence in the forest. 

"By Saint George!" cried Sir Hugh, "I have never seen signs of so stern a 
fight, and I am right glad that we have been in time to save you. 'I'll be 
perfectly frank with you, and if it suits you it will suit me very well. 

"'Precisely what I don't want you to do. He had insisted, however, upon 
efficiency in the work, and had, therefore, paid off certain drunken and idle 
employees who were members of the all-powerful society. What was in the letter 
we could never discover, but I could see as he held it that it was short and 
written in a scrawling hand. " 

"I think I should back my little friend," said Lord John, caressing his 
Express. 

"It's not a secret," she cried. My coffee had not yet come, and I wondered what 
the cause of the delay could be. 

"Is Miss Cushing at home?" asked Holmes. "Now look at this. " 

Alleyne turned to the letter, and, as his eyes rested upon it, his face turned 
pale and a cry of surprise and grief burst from his lips. , as things go. E. D. 
upon the linen. So much is fairly clear. " 

Young Overton's face assumed the bothered look of the man who is more 
accustomed to using his muscles than his wits, but by degrees, with many 
repetitions and obscurities which I may omit from his narrative, he laid his 
strange story before us. "Some wine, Tita, from the Florence flask! Had it not 
been for you, I tremble to think of what might have come of it. Surely our 
profession, Mr. "  What is left but anti-climax in the life of a journalist 
after that! 

But let me not end on sensational headlines and a merely personal triumph. As 
to my own case, I am ready to give you any information which may assist you in 
forming an opinion. 

"'When did it happen, doctor?' asked Trevor. "What do you think of that?" 

"It seems to be a very delicate test," I remarked. The hundred waiting miners 
stood as motionless and helpless as if they were paralyzed. The whole place was 
turned upside down, drawers burst open, and presses ransacked, with the result 
that an odd volume of Pope's 'Homer,' two plated candlesticks, an ivory 
letter-weight, a small oak barometer, and a ball of twine are all that have 
vanished. 

"Come!" gasped the woman. 'You must not say a word to any one about it, and I 
shall see you again soon. ' With that he seized my hair in both his hands, and 
tugged until I yelled with the pain. '" 

"Ha! It came like that, did it?" said Holmes thoughtfully. " 

"And it is--" 

"That Miss Flora Millar, the lady who had caused the disturbance, has actually 
been arrested. " 

"Yes. The furniture was scattered about in every direction, with dismantled 
shelves and open drawers, as if the lady had hurriedly ransacked them before 
her flight. I tried to look out of the windows to see something of where we 
were, but they were made of frosted glass, and I could make out nothing save 
the occasional bright blur of a passing light. Have you turned the case over in 
your mind?" 

"Yes, I have thought a good deal of it in the course of the day. " 

The man drew out paper and tobacco and twirled the one up in the other with 
surprising dexterity. " 

"And I am the witness?" 

"If you will be so good. Holmes. You leave out a link or two, and I can't get 
over the gap. You aided her to escape. " 

"I remember. Sherlock Holmes, before you go to the official police. You may be 
very smart and clever, but the old hound is the best, when all is said and 
done. " 

"I need not say that any publicity given to such an idea--any levity in your 
narrative of what occurred--would be exceedingly offensive to me. We sat all 
three in a semicircle, with our heads advanced, and our chins upon our hands, 
while the strange, jerky little fellow, with his high, shining head, puffed 
uneasily in the centre. What think you of it, my worthy Captal? He took you at 
Cocherel, and, by my soul! you will have the chance now to pay that score. 

"One thousand Aves and as many Credos, said standing with arms outstretched 
before the shrine of the Virgin, may help thee to remember that the Creator 
hath given us two ears and but one mouth, as a token that there is twice the 
work for the one as for the other. I have seldom heard him mention her under 
any other name. " 

"Nor should I, but we are bound to take every possibility into account. "If you 
consider how much creasote is carted about London in one day, it is no great 
wonder that our trail should have been crossed. Can you not see that there are 
other foes in this world besides Frenchmen, and as much glory to be gained in 
conquering them? Would it not be a proud day for knight or squire if he could 
overthrow seven adversaries in the lists? Yet here are we in the lists of life, 
and there come the seven black champions against us Sir Pride, Sir 
Covetousness, Sir Lust, Sir Anger, Sir Gluttony, Sir Envy, and Sir Sloth. " 

"I should indeed love to look upon them," Alleyne answered; "but I have come 
from Beaulieu for a purpose, and I must be true to my service, even as thou art 
true to thine. Then, with a gesture of desperation, he tore the mask from his 
face and hurled it upon the ground. Still, as the shadows deepened, she spoke 
of valor and virtue, of loyalty, honor, and fame, and still they sat drinking 
in her words while the fire burned down and the red ash turned to gray. " 

"Quite so, it is perfectly possible. "Somebody killed the man, and whoever it 
was I could clearly prove to you that he should have done it some other way. 
What does he mean by allowing his retreat to be cut off like that? What does he 
mean by using a shotgun when silence was his one chance of escape? Come, Mr. 
There is no safety for any of us. I rode back, but again saw nothing of the 
carriage, and now, as you perceive, it has returned after me. I'm a 
frontiersman from the extreme edge of the Knowable, and I feel quite out of 
place when I leave my study and come into touch with all you great, rough, 
hulking creatures. It was all so unthinkable. Worse still, she was rich. If 
Holmes's researches were successful, she would be an heiress. It is an open 
secret that the credit of this smart capture belongs entirely to the well-known 
Scotland Yard officials, Messrs. I walked to the window, and looked out on the 
deserted street. Now I met her appealing gaze with an unresponsive eye. 
Further, he had become a man of experience, was counted brave among brave men, 
had won the esteem and confidence of her father, and, above all, had been 
listened to by him when he told him the secret of his love. " 

"I would be right glad to study under such a master," said Alleyne; "but I am 
sworn to follow my lord whilst this war lasts. Think of it, washed by the rain 
and scorched by the sun and swept by the wind for those unnumbered ages. Man 
only came into being yesterday so far as geological times goes. Why, then, 
should it be taken for granted that all this stupendous preparation was for his 
benefit?" 

"For whose then--or for what?" 

Summerlee shrugged his shoulders. 

One policeman was indeed after him already; but the incident, as luck would 
have it, did the adventurer a great deal more good than harm. He seemed to take 
a fancy to me from the first, and within two days of our meeting he came to see 
me at Lee. His life was irregular, but in one respect he was regularity itself. 
From the pocket of his light summer overcoat protruded the bundle of indorsed 
papers which proclaimed his profession. Every day of that voyage I loved her 
more, and many a time since have I kneeled down in the darkness of the night 
watch and kissed the deck of that ship because I knew her dear feet had trod 
it. " 

"Well, I cannot blame you for standing by your own wife. On opening the 
Standard, however, I found that there was a fresh allusion to the business. " 

"It is my trade to risk my skin," growled the archer; but none the less he 
thrust his quiver over his hip again and turned his face for the west. Miss 
Stoner turned white to the lips as she listened. A wondrous subtle thing is 
love, for here were we two who had never seen each other before that day, 
between whom no word or even look of affection had ever passed, and yet now in 
an hour of trouble our hands instinctively sought for each other. This morning 
he was removed to a cell, and I, after going through all the police 
formalities, have hurried round to you to implore you to use your skill in 
unravelling the matter. Patrick Cairns occupies too large a proportion of our 
carpet. " 

"Mr. He was a man of good family and of great ability, but of incurably vicious 
habits, who had by an ingenious system of fraud obtained huge sums of money 
from the leading London merchants. Such had he imagined the angels, and such he 
had tried to paint them in the Beaulieu missals; but here there was something 
human, were it only in the battered hawk and discolored dress, which sent a 
tingle and thrill through his nerves such as no dream of radiant and stainless 
spirit had ever yet been able to conjure up. " 

"And did you slay him also, my lord?" asked Ford with reverence. 

"There is one thing occurs to me," said he at last. Next day we were picked up 
by the brig _Hotspur_, bound for Australia, whose captain found no difficulty 
in believing that we were the survivors of a passenger ship which had 
foundered. The transport ship Gloria Scott was set down by the Admiralty as 
being lost at sea, and no word has ever leaked out as to her true fate. It was 
a relief to me when at last, after a light dinner, we set out upon our 
expedition. They talk of woman's instinct; perhaps it was woman's instinct 
which gave me that feeling. I stood among the rocks watching them, very much 
puzzled as to what I should do next. " 

"Oh, you mean the little problem of the Grosvenor Square furniture van. There 
is less dust in this corner of the shelf than elsewhere. Listen as one may, 
there is no shadow of a sound in all that mighty wilderness; nothing but 
silence--complete and heart-subduing silence. , Mr. " 

"Now may the Lord be praised!" cried the other. You quite follow me?" 

"Entirely. How many landsmen are there who would drink rum when they could get 
these other spirits? Yes, I was certain it was a seaman. " 

MacDonald shook his obstinate Scotch head. Holmes," said Lestrade, "that every 
carriage has been carefully examined. "I am a married man, and have been so for 
three years. 

"That's so. "If you kick up any more row I'll open the kennels and let out 
forty-three dogs upon you. ' 

"'He would rather have our small price than your big one,' said he. ILLINGWORTH 
(laughing):  'Beyond a doubt. He much regretted that any personal bias should 
have been read into his remarks, which were entirely dictated by his desire for 
scientific truth. I can remember his comment when the story was concluded. " 

"By the Lord, you'll be a man after McGinty's heart!" 

"What, does he hate the police too?" 

Scanlan burst out laughing. 

"It's mum with me so long as I see you living on the straight," said the 
captain. "We have marked you down as a willing man, and we believe that you 
will do good work in these parts. That means molecular disturbance. Therefore 
Simpson becomes eliminated from the case, and our attention centers upon 
Straker and his wife, the only two people who could have chosen curried mutton 
for supper that night. " 

"Good, Lestrade, very good," said Holmes. It is the Lady Eva Blackwell, the 
most beautiful debutante of last season. Barclay went upon her return. " 

"In that case, of course, I'd come forward. I dine at seven. I loathe and fear 
him more than I can say. We know that a man is being done to death, and every 
hour may be vital. Forbes flung open the door, and we both ran into the back 
room or kitchen, but the woman had got there before us. She stared at us with 
defiant eyes, and then, suddenly recognizing me, an expression of absolute 
astonishment came over her face. 

Young Jefferson Hope rode on with his companions, gloomy and taciturn. It has 
been found in the front garden of an empty house in Campden House Road. 

"I believe it is the same place as the painted picture," said I. 

"And so say I," said Alleyne. "It's a name for any kind of devil. "I guess 
you'd best reckon on my hearing all that passes. " 

"Small!" shrieked the other. But of these two men the one is Sir Hugh 
Calverley, and the other is Sir Robert Knolles. Yes, sir, my own views are very 
different. There he is!" 

There was a violent peal at the bell, and in a few seconds the fair-haired 
detective came up the stairs, three steps at a time, and burst into our 
sitting-room. C. , from A. " 

"So did a many," quoth Simon. 

"How is this, sirs?" said he. " 

"Have you seen him?" 

"No, sir. 

"Exactly. He had a very dark, fearsome face, and a gleam in his eyes that comes 
back to me in my dreams. If you could persuade him to come here and give us the 
benefit of his unique experience of this disease, the investigation of which 
has been his dearest hobby, I cannot doubt that he could help me. Therefore, we 
can say for certain that young Cadogan West was placed on it. You will 
perceive, Watson, that the glasses are concave and of unusual strength. In some 
parts it widens into a morass. These details only struck our attention 
afterwards, for our thoughts were entirely absorbed by the terrible object 
which lay upon the tigerskin hearthrug in front of the fire. 

"Having secured him, it is evident to me that a consultation of some sort was 
held. But I want to know why the word 'moor' should have been written?" 

"Because he could not find it in print. See the rising sun flashes full upon it 
and sparkles on the golden lions. Time was when none but my countrymen could do 
these things; but there is Clement of Chartres and others in France who are 
very worthy workmen. You've lost your sense of proportion. You don't know this 
Baldwin. " 

"Then the page we have seen--" 

"Is such as we might expect. 

"But the tracks!" I cried. Then there is another note in the Morning Post to 
say that the marriage would be an absolutely quiet one, that it would be at St. 
But every second night we made sure if he was still there by putting a light in 
the window, and if there was an answer my husband took out some bread and meat 
to him. " 

"Why," said I, greatly relieved, "this makes it all easy. "Who would associate 
crime with these dear old homesteads?" 

"They always fill me with a certain horror. 

"Because your tongue may save your pate. "Name the sum, and I will pay it. " 

"No, the debt is not to me. But wait an instant!" He stood upon a chair, and, 
holding up the light in his left hand, he curved his right arm over the broad 
hat and round the long ringlets. Finally, an analysis has shown that the 
remains of his supper left by the stable-lad contain an appreciable quantity of 
powdered opium, while the people at the house partook of the same dish on the 
same night without any ill effect. Such is the last picture of them that I have 
carried away. The great cities already knew their fate and so far as we could 
gather were preparing to meet it with dignity and resignation. I held my 
bedroom candle lit in my hand, and, by its light, behind the first man I saw 
two others, who were in the act of entering. We shall find him in Hudson Street 
to-morrow, Watson, and meanwhile I should be the criminal myself if I kept you 
out of bed any longer. Well, having seen the back of Caulfield Gardens, I 
visited the front and satisfied myself that the bird was indeed flown. He could 
hide his hound, but he could not hush its voice, and hence came those cries 
which even in daylight were not pleasant to hear. Then he fell back into an 
arm-chair so limp and exhausted with his own emotions that we had to pour 
brandy down his throat to keep him from fainting. Word had spread of what was 
going forward, and the rivals were already surrounded, not only by the English 
archers of the Company, but by hundreds of arbalestiers and men-at-arms from 
the bands of Ortingo and La Nuit, to the latter of which the Brabanter 
belonged. 

"There is a mark yonder on the hill," said he; "mayhap you can discern it. " 

"Yes, but there is another empty house farther up the street which he must have 
passed before he came to this one. Just as he finished, however, we drove 
through two scattered villages, where a few lights still glimmered in the 
windows. " 

The second man was a long, dried-up creature, with lank hair and sallow cheeks. 
Is it possible that even now, when I give you these results, you are unable to 
see how they are attained?" 

"I have no doubt that I am very stupid, but I must confess that I am unable to 
follow you. 

"The writing on the wall was done with a man's forefinger dipped in blood. Men 
who had only known the quiet thinker and logician of Baker Street would have 
failed to recognise him. His face flushed and darkened. The servant deposed 
that she heard him enter the front room on the second floor, generally used as 
his sitting-room. He had always a taste for low company. 

"Why, Mr. " 

"Not at all. They were lighting the lamps as I came back with the brandy. Does 
that make any impression on your mind?" 

"Queer, certainly! But what do you gather from it?" 

"That he wanted no gossip about his wealth. " 

"Well, now, let us put ourselves in the place of Jonathan Small. " 

"There will be two or three in the boat. I shall be shut up with the tire-women 
else, and have a week of spindle and bodkin, when I would fain be galloping 
Troubadour up Wilverley Walk, or loosing little Roland at the Vinney Ridge 
herons. " 

Mr. "This very night will I set apart a golden ouche to be offered on the 
shrine of my name-saint. 

"I wrote it rather hurriedly. Sherlock Holmes!" she cried, glancing from one to 
the other of us, and finally, with a woman's quick intuition, fastening upon my 
companion, "I am so glad that you have come. 

"There is something devilish in this, Watson," said he, more moved than I had 
ever before seen him. "We have a cook whose omelettes are only excelled by her 
cutlets. Two-hour spells in the future, for each of us. " 

"Then I'll just finish my pipe in starting the first one," said Professor 
Summerlee; and from that time onwards we never trusted ourselves again without 
a watchman. 

"My fiddle would be the better for new strings," he remarked. My wife had 
always been a woman of a frank, open nature, and it gave me a chill to see her 
slinking into her own room, and crying out and wincing when her own husband 
spoke to her. All was as we had seen it in the daytime. John Straker, who is a 
married man, lived in a small villa about two hundred yards from the stables. 

"There is the smoke from Bazas, on the further side of Garonne," quoth he. 
There is a door here which he might have attempted. " 

"And the lady, I fancy, is Miss Stoner," observed Holmes, shading his eyes. I 
glanced my eyes down it, catching a profusion of notes of admiration, with 
stray "magnifiques," "coup-de-maitres," and "tours-de-force," all testifying to 
the ardent admiration of the Frenchman. They were all steady, chapel-going 
folk, small farmers, well known and respected over the country-side, while I 
was always a bit of a rover. I swear that he might have twisted it off had I 
understood what it would mean to Garcia. " 

"Strange," said I, "how terms of what in another man I should call laziness 
alternate with your fits of splendid energy and vigor. His heart is as good as 
thine or mine but he hath more in his pate than ever you will carry under that 
tin pot of thine, and as a consequence he can see farther into things, so that 
they weigh upon him more. His shoes were of red leather, daintily pointed at 
the toes, but not yet prolonged to the extravagant lengths which the succeeding 
reign was to bring into fashion. His slippers, too, were gone, but his boots 
were left behind. 

"It has been touch and go with him," said I, "but he'll live now. Arthur 
Willaby can stay with you. It appears--though this James only heard 
yesterday--that they were pursued, that Hayes struck the pursuer with his 
stick, and that the man died of his injuries. So amazed was I that I threw out 
my hand to make sure that the man himself was standing beside me. 

Further on, at the edge of the woodland, he came upon a chapman and his wife, 
who sat upon a fallen tree. " 

"Yes," said Alleyne, "he hath gone. Jones and I resumed our cigars and our 
talk. Suddenly, however, Holmes's voice broke in upon us. He was again in the 
grip of his mysterious malady. I say that he would have proposed such a bargain 
to me, but he did not actually do so, for events moved too quickly for him, and 
he had not time to put his plans into practice. I painted my face, and to make 
myself as pitiable as possible I made a good scar and fixed one side of my lip 
in a twist by the aid of a small slip of flesh-coloured plaster. Was it not 
extraordinary? Puzzle as I would, I could make nothing at all of what it meant. 
The reapers were slowly trooping back to their work. 

"Are you armed?" I asked. The total value of the estate was close on to a 
million. 

All these details I observed afterwards. " 

"Did you notice this scratch?" 

"No, sir, I did not. "I did but wish to learn the feel of them, since I am like 
to have such trinkets hung to my own girdle for some years to come. Whatever 
come, you always find me here. But no able to keep Indians. 

"Well, there's no need for me to dwell on that part of it. His cold and proud 
nature was always averse, however, from anything in the shape of public 
applause, and he bound me in the most stringent terms to say no further word of 
himself, his methods, or his successes--a prohibition which, as I have 
explained, has only now been removed. An observer would have found it difficult 
to say whether he was nearer to forty or to sixty. The white figure lay 
motionless in the middle of the great plain. Here the two combatants drew their 
swords and threw off their doublets, for neither had any defensive armor. " 

It was evidently taken by a snapshot from a small camera. 

"See here, mister," said he, "I make no complaint of being man-handled in this 
fashion, but I would have you call things by their right names. From amid the 
branches there jutted out the grey gables and high roof-tree of a very old 
mansion. The proceedings against the page broke down for want of evidence, and 
the Brook Street Mystery, as it was called, has never until now been fully 
dealt with in any public print. I sent in my testimonial and application, but 
without the least hope of getting it. If you are unable to come I shall give 
you fuller details, and would esteem it a great kindness if you would favour me 
with your opinion. The farther we go the less likely it is that we will get any 
general view. 

"Twenty years ago," he said, "your father, the Franklin of Minstead, died, 
leaving to the Abbey three hides of rich land in the hundred of Malwood, and 
leaving to us also his infant son on condition that we should rear him until he 
came to man's estate. All I had to do then was to do as much for Stangerson, 
and so pay off John Ferrier's debt. I sat up all night with paper and ink, and 
by the morning I had the two charts all ready, signed with the sign of 
four,--that is, of Abdullah, Akbar, Mahomet, and myself. The Indians carried 
first our canoes and then our stores through the brushwood, which is very thick 
at this point, while we four whites, our rifles on our shoulders, walked 
between them and any danger coming from the woods. 

"He is possessed of a devil!" they shouted. " 

"Tut! It was nothing," said he; but it burned and ached all the same. St. Clair 
had fainted at the sight of the blood upon the window, and she was escorted 
home in a cab by the police, as her presence could be of no help to them in 
their investigations. I may add that his whole debts at the present moment, as 
far as we have been able to ascertain, amount to 88 pounds 10s. " 







The Statement of the Case 

Miss Morstan entered the room with a firm step and an outward composure of 
manner. L. --but she lives in Coombe Tracey. " 

"Who is she?" I asked. If it is a purely arbitrary one, it may be impossible 
for us to solve it. My comrades might be my masters on the rocks, but I knew 
that I would be supreme among those branches. On the last occasion he had 
remarked that if my friend would only come with me he would be glad to extend 
his hospitality to him also. " 

Unwelcome truths are not popular. "Wonderful! It's all as clear as crystal, as 
you put it. It struck me that so astute a man as Straker would not undertake 
this delicate tendon-nicking without a little practice. In the far corner was a 
smithy, where a grimy lad was at work. The valley in which he found himself 
divided and sub-divided into many gorges, which were so like each other that it 
was impossible to distinguish one from the other. That opening of the door 
which I had heard after I had returned to my room might mean that he had gone 
out to keep some clandestine appointment. Our inquiries led to no result; and 
from that day to this no word has ever been heard of my unfortunate father. He 
continually drummed his fingers on the table, gnawed his nails, and gave other 
signs of nervous impatience. Holmes looked even thinner and keener than of old, 
but there was a dead-white tinge in his aquiline face which told me that his 
life recently had not been a healthy one. If only you two know of this 
incident, there is no reason why it should go any farther. " 

"Did you correspond with him?" 

The lady looked quickly up with an angry gleam in her hazel eyes. It occurred 
to me at the time. The body exhibited no traces of violence, and there can be 
no doubt that the deceased had been the victim of an unfortunate accident, 
which should have the effect of calling the attention of the authorities to the 
condition of the riverside landing-stages. I caught glimpses of velvet chairs, 
a high white marble mantel-piece, and what seemed to be a suit of Japanese 
armor at one side of it. What a three column article for the paper!  What a 
foundation for a career!  A correspondentship in the next great war might be 
within my reach. Holmes. " 

"Don't we?" my friend answered thoughtfully. You are my heart, my life, my one 
and only thought. 4. ' 

"'What, the red-headed man?' 

"'Yes. 

"'But it was you who broke her innocent heart,' I shrieked, thrusting the box 
before him. " 

Of course, what I give you is what I learned in business; so it goes no 
further. "I am the law of England and the mouthpiece of his most gracious and 
royal majesty, Edward the Third. 

A look of annoyance passed over Holmes's face. " 

"And the ruffled wing," added Hordle John. His head was sunk upon his breast, 
and he looked from my point of view like a strange, lank bird, with dull gray 
plumage and a black top-knot. He was fully clothed, though there were signs 
that his dressing had been done in a hurry. I think I will leave him to tell 
his very remarkable experience in his own fashion. I know I ought to have 
spoken to Lord St. 

Barrymore was crouching at the window with the candle held against the glass. 
'Why, it's thirty year and more since I saw you last. ' 

"'Where have you been?' I asked, more sternly. 

"I have told you that Mr. 

"It seems to me to be a most dark and sinister business. 

"If I was to go, who would look after 'im?"  He jerked his head toward his 
master. Do you feel a creeping, shrinking sensation, Watson, when you stand 
before the serpents in the Zoo, and see the slithery, gliding, venomous 
creatures, with their deadly eyes and wicked, flattened faces? Well, that's how 
Milverton impresses me. My nets are closing upon him, even as his are upon Sir 
Henry, and with your help he is already almost at my mercy. There is a 
trap-door communicating with the roof, and it is partly open. Toller, for that 
is his name, is a rough, uncouth man, with grizzled hair and whiskers, and a 
perpetual smell of drink. If you could send her into the cellar on some errand, 
and then turn the key upon her, you would facilitate matters immensely. That's 
enough for me and you. Well, yesterday the ape-men got hold of a dozen of the 
humans and brought them in as prisoners. Anyhow, some of you will take no 
further hand, and there are sixty more besides yourselves that will see a jail 
this night. The one is clear and firm. A Case of Identity V. We opened it, and 
the light of the lantern gleamed upon a collection of gems such as I have read 
of and thought about when I was a little lad at Pershore. There was no sign of 
any violence, and the water was but two feet deep, so that the jury, having 
regard to his known eccentricity, brought in a verdict of 'suicide. Pickwick's 
benevolence in his appearance, marred only by the insincerity of the fixed 
smile and by the hard glitter of those restless and penetrating eyes. His voice 
was as smooth and suave as his countenance, as he advanced with a plump little 
hand extended, murmuring his regret for having missed us at his first visit. He 
made a slight motion to me to approach him, and instantly, as he turned his 
face half round to the company once more, subsided into a doddering, 
loose-lipped senility. 

"I think, gentlemen," said Holmes, quietly, "that we had best take up our 
position behind the door. "What do you think of it, Watson?" 

"A masterpiece. We have only to return home and report him as the brazen 
imposter that he is. Then the two gentlemen passed us, walking, and we followed 
down Baker Street and along--" 

"I know," said Holmes. 

"One day, however, I got word that he was dying. "The police are already 
upstairs. You can't open it. " 

"You haven't seen any of them?" 

"No, sir. "But it is time young chickens went to roost when they dare cackle 
against their elders. I give you my word that I would have spoken out if it 
went against him at the Assizes. " 

It was not until he had received his apology that our touchy friend would 
suffer himself to be appeased. For some time back Mawson & Williams, the famous 
financial house, have been the guardians of securities which amount in the 
aggregate to a sum of considerably over a million sterling. 

If it were grim and desolate upon the English border, however, what can 
describe the hideous barrenness of this ten times harried tract of France? The 
whole face of the country was scarred and disfigured, mottled over with the 
black blotches of burned farm-steadings, and the gray, gaunt gable-ends of what 
had been chateaux. "I found her very pale and distressed. "A child would know 
Silver Blaze, with his white forehead and his mottled off-foreleg. The rest he 
handed to his comrade, who drank the wine, and then, to the clerk's increasing 
amazement, made a show of swallowing the bottle, with such skill that Alleyne 
seemed to see it vanish down his throat. This is it on the blue paper, and 
these slips, as I have explained, are the rough draft. Mortimer has his 
headquarters. The two of them were destined to travel together round the world 
before Sir Henry had become once more the hale, hearty man that he had been 
before he became master of that ill-omened estate. Some deviltry is intended 
against one Douglas, whoever he may be, residing as stated, a rich country 
gentleman. When, following the course of our brook, we at last reached our 
glade and saw the thorny barricade of our camp, we thought that our adventures 
were at an end. Yet in some ways I feel that yesterday has not been wasted. He 
was still tingling from this new experience when he came out upon the high-road 
and saw a sight which drove all other thoughts from his mind. 

"I can take more than that," said he. Sandeford, in the presence of these 
witnesses. 

"Yes, sir, I fear that I am a little late, but the trains were awkward. Mr. 
Windibank draws my interest every quarter and pays it over to mother, and I 
find that I can do pretty well with what I earn at typewriting. " 

"Oh, well, he was very good about it. There was the gentle rustle of a woman's 
dress. It was the former who forced the pace. You say over them ones that you 
used to say every night in the waggon when we was on the Plains. She is herself 
the very soul of delicacy. There is always a look of fear upon her face--a look 
as if she were waiting and expecting. On one side of him sat old Johnston, who 
was busy in trimming the feathers of some arrows to his liking; and on the 
other Hordle John, who lay with his great limbs all asprawl, and his headpiece 
balanced upon his uplifted foot. " 

"Tuesday evening!" I exclaimed. , as things go. C. H. for J. Now they flew to 
their arms as to their birthright. That horrible feeling of constriction was 
closing in upon me. I feel better now, and I will put the facts before you as 
shortly and yet as clearly as I can. Then I came to the conclusion that the 
bell was out of order. That was when he picked up with this outcast padre here. 
Patent-leather boots had gone round, and Square-toes had hopped over. There is 
no mystery about it at all. Birds were calling among the foliage--especially 
one with a peculiar whooping cry which was new to us--but beyond these sounds 
there were no signs of life. 

Our first care was to make some sort of list of our own stores, so that we 
might know what we had to rely upon. " 

I stooped under the rude lintel, and there he sat upon a stone outside, his 
gray eyes dancing with amusement as they fell upon my astonished features. 
Watson! I assure you that you will be helping us--helping me greatly if you 
will guide us on that point. " 

My humble name and title did not appear to impress Mr. 

"Well, I couldn't be sure of that, but I dare say my fare knew all about it. 
Windibank," Holmes continued. "I think of writing another little monograph some 
of these days on the typewriter and its relation to crime. Did you not note, 
Alleyne, that the Lady Tiphaine did give us warning last night that danger was 
coming upon us?" 

"She did, my lord. " 

"From East London. Malone, this is very--very exalted. " 

"Look here, sir," said I, backing to the door and opening it; "you can be as 
abusive as you like. It was a cool hand, whoever it was, to go and give the 
alarm like that. It is in New Zealand stock, paying 4 1/2 per cent. There was 
just one way of doing it, and I did it. " She tried to speak boldly, but she 
was still deadly pale and could hardly get her words out for the trembling of 
her lips. Theorist,--don't promise too much!" snapped the detective. "You may 
find it a harder matter than you think. "Pray let me have a detailed account of 
what the circumstances are which have disturbed you. This is my friend and 
colleague, Dr. Send him to gaol now, and you make him a gaol-bird for life. 
Besides, it is the season of forgiveness. " 

"Who did know of the existence of that letter?" 

"No one in the house. " 

Holmes gave an ejaculation of impatience. Side by side on the narrow shawl 
knelt the two wanderers, the little prattling child and the reckless, hardened 
adventurer. Her chubby face, and his haggard, angular visage were both turned 
up to the cloudless heaven in heartfelt entreaty to that dread being with whom 
they were face to face, while the two voices--the one thin and clear, the other 
deep and harsh--united in the entreaty for mercy and forgiveness. She has been 
married three years, and believes that her position is quite secure, having 
shown her husband the death certificate of some man whose name she has assumed, 
when suddenly her whereabouts is discovered by her first husband; or, we may 
suppose, by some unscrupulous woman who has attached herself to the invalid. It 
lasted forty minutes, and at a quarter-past nine Mrs. " 

I felt rather indignant at having two characters whom I had admired treated in 
this cavalier style. 

"We have seven more minutes," said he. "  "Load them all up, young fellah my 
lad, for we're not going to be taken alive, and don't you think it!  That's the 
row they make when they are excited. A Scandal in Bohemia II. Vague shapes 
swirled and swam amid the dark cloud-bank, each a menace and a warning of 
something coming, the advent of some unspeakable dweller upon the threshold, 
whose very shadow would blast my soul. A freezing horror took possession of me. 
" 

"These theories take no account of the telegram. The woods about this point 
fall away to the left and the right, while the road curves upwards and the wind 
sweeps keenly over the swelling uplands. He wore a ruddy-tinted tweed suit and 
had the weather-beaten appearance of one who has spent most of his time in the 
open air, and yet there was something in his steady eye and the quiet assurance 
of his bearing which indicated the gentleman. 

"Sir William," said he, "it is my intention to attempt a small deed, and I ask 
you therefore that you will lead this outfall upon the camp. " 

"I'm expecting the end of the world to-day, Austin. He came running out to meet 
us with a face of horror. We watched him staring round with frightened eyes. 

"You have a grand gift of silence, Watson," said he. One has to be discreet 
when one talks of high matters of state. I spotted the bottle in which this 
preparation was kept, and when they were all gone, I helped myself to a little 
of it. To follow them and break into their intimate conversation seemed to be 
an outrage, and yet my clear duty was never for an instant to let him out of my 
sight. I seem to have lost the faculty of thought. Now, how on earth could you 
know that the stolen silver was at the bottom of that pond?" 

"I didn't know it. Lestrade, I will ask you all to accompany me to the top 
landing. One morning a young girl called, fashionably dressed, and stayed for 
half an hour or more. 

"Pretty doin's!  What!" 

That was his ejaculation as each fresh tremendous combination of death and 
disaster displayed itself before us. The magistrate could not possibly, on the 
evidence, have held them for a higher court. We got on them before they could 
load, and they stood to it like men; but we had the upper hand of them, and in 
five minutes it was all over. We also continually visited their caves, which 
were most remarkable places, though whether made by man or by Nature we have 
never been able to determine. We had all braced our courage for death, but this 
fearful and sudden new fact--that we must continue to live after we had 
survived the race to which we belonged--struck us with the shock of a physical 
blow and left us prostrate. We should not _a priori_ have expected it, but it 
is undoubtedly a fact. It was some distance off, where a winding passage leads 
to a great empty hall, the brick walls of which were all crumbling to pieces. 

"Professor Challenger," said he, in a solemn voice, which quavered with 
emotion, "I owe you an apology. He had been watching me eagerly out of his 
small eyes, and I could see a shadow pass over his face as I spoke. If we can 
get his bolster-cover round his arms and then 'phone up a stomach-pump, we'll 
give the old dear the supper of his life. " 

"I did not say that I desired you to do it. This man Small is a pretty shrewd 
fellow. Finally, he sprang down with an ejaculation of satisfaction. 

"Old Trevor was evidently a man of some wealth and consideration, a J. 

One incident occurred, however, before we left the gorge, which is of 
importance in view of what came afterwards. We have shared this same room for 
some years, and it would be amusing if we ended by sharing the same cell. 
Luke's, and really, but for the happy chance of your being in town, I should 
have been at a loss what to do. " 

"I am very busy just now, and I desire no distractions," my friend answered. A 
volcanic tube full of blue clay. 

"A guerdon--a guerdon, my knight of the staring eyes!" cried one. The kitchen 
stands right at the back of the house. But we found the knife some feet away 
from the body, so that seems impossible. Yes, I have very little hesitation in 
saying that could we examine the waste-paper baskets of the hotels around 
Charing Cross until we found the remains of the mutilated Times leader we could 
lay our hands straight upon the person who sent this singular message. Now we 
are on the bridge. " 

"You wouldn't kill this man?" 

"The less you know, Friend Morris, the easier your conscience will be, and the 
better you will sleep. "There is no need to urge me, friends, for my own wishes 
would draw me to France, and it would be a joy to me if I could go with you. 
The office has been a perfect pandemonium ever since you left in the morning. " 

"But what can oxygen effect in the face of a poisoning of the ether? There is 
not a greater difference in quality between a brick-bat and a gas than there is 
between oxygen and ether. There was this distant light to illuminate the gloom 
of the immediate future. 

"Then we returned to the office, and searched the stairs and the passage 
without result. He lit the two candles which stood upon the mantelpiece, and 
then he proceeded to turn back the corner of the carpet in the neighborhood of 
the door. There are some trees, Watson, which grow to a certain height, and 
then suddenly develop some unsightly eccentricity. As you are aware, such 
devices are common in old libraries. Then I examined the gun. Douglas, and I 
could not let her enter the room. On a quiet countryside, where all gossip is 
welcome, this weakness of the lady of the Manor House did not pass without 
remark, and it bulked larger upon people's memory when the events arose which 
gave it a very special significance. I waited all day without news of him. 
That's God's truth, gentlemen, every word of it, and I heard no more about it 
until that lad came riding up with a note which made me walk in here, like a 
jay, and give myself into your hands. " 

"Jonathan Wild wasn't a detective, and he wasn't in a novel. Luke, for there is 
much to be done in the time. You will have leisure, therefore, if it please you 
to take service under me, in which to learn your devoir. The road from Chiltern 
Grange is a lonely one, and at one spot it is particularly so, for it lies for 
over a mile between Charlington Heath upon one side and the woods which lie 
round Charlington Hall upon the other. 



"They had gone a mile or two when they passed one of the 

night shepherds upon the moorlands, and they cried to 

him to know if he had seen the hunt. McMurdo?" 

"Sure. " 

"I can't forget that I spoke my heart to you once, and that you kept it to 
yourself, even though the Boss himself came to ask you about it. In the middle 
of it was the black figure of the secretary, his head advanced, peering out 
into the night. Mortimer, and he was told by the latter all details about the 
arrival of Henry Baskerville. On the summit, hard and clear like an equestrian 
statue upon its pedestal, was a mounted soldier, dark and stern, his rifle 
poised ready over his forearm. This paste in the tin is no doubt the luminous 
mixture with which the creature was daubed. When you catch this fellow, you 
will find that he has one of these multiplex knives in his possession. He drew 
no weapon, but he rushed at me and threw his long arms around me. He is not a 
man with intimate friends. I found him much troubled over the disappearance of 
his little spaniel. Now, I found that one of them was lying on the floor, one 
was on the side table near the window, and the third was where I had left it. 
The other fellow is probably an Italian also, and a member of the Mafia. There 
was no powder-blackening on the clothes. It was only too clear that some sudden 
and terrible disaster had occurred during his absence--a disaster which had 
embraced them all, and yet had left no traces behind it. We have gained that 
much. We are aware that you went down to the office in the fog on Monday night, 
but that you were seen and followed by young Cadogan West, who had probably 
some previous reason to suspect you. He would naturally have made an 
appointment with the foreign agent and kept his evening clear. I can see him 
now, with yellow, pasty face, drooping lids, and pin-point pupils, all huddled 
in a chair, the wreck and ruin of a noble man. The Indians carried first our 
canoes and then our stores through the brushwood, which is very thick at this 
point, while we four whites, our rifles on our shoulders, walked between them 
and any danger coming from the woods. Very good. Brooding over the case in that 
den of his, it suddenly struck him what absolutely damning evidence he could 
make against McFarlane by using that thumb-mark. It was the simplest thing in 
the world for him to take a wax impression from the seal, to moisten it in as 
much blood as he could get from a pin-prick, and to put the mark upon the wall 
during the night, either with his own hand or with that of his housekeeper. 

"The main fact is that he HAD the pearl, and at that moment, when it was on his 
person, he was pursued by the police. "Well, it would be absurd to deny that 
the case is a very abstruse and complicated one, but I can promise you that I 
will look into the matter and let you know any points which may strike me. " 

He was a dangerous suitor, with his glib Irish tongue, and his pretty, coaxing 
ways. "Have I not told her all that hath befallen us?" 

"You have said much, my fair lord; and yet, if I may say so, it is somewhat 
crowded together, so that my Lady Loring can, mayhap, scarce follow it. 

"And good?" 

"As an angel. 

"The Coroner: What do you mean? 

"Witness: I was so disturbed and excited as I rushed out into the open, that I 
could think of nothing except of my father. It was only a glimpse; but I have a 
quick eye for these things, and I never doubted who it was. Carefully Holmes 
held each separate shard to the light, but in no way did it differ from any 
other shattered piece of plaster. Many an anxious consultation he held with 
Black Simon, Sam Aylward, and other of his more experienced followers, as to 
who should come and who should stay. We were passing along the edge of this 
cover when my eye was caught by the gleam of something white within it. Is it, 
then, stretching our inference too far to say that the presentation was on the 
occasion of the change?" 

"It certainly seems probable. ' There was no name appended to this message. ' 

"'You're only wasting your time, sir, and every minute now is of importance,' 
cried the commissionnaire; 'take my word for it that my old woman has nothing 
to do with it, and come down to the other end of the street. 

"'You have boxed a good deal in your youth. The incidents of the next few days 
are indelibly graven upon my recollection, and I can tell them without 
reference to the notes made at the time. One after another they went down, and 
there were not half-a-dozen surviving by the time my companion and I could come 
to their help. Save for this one excursion, he spent his days in long and often 
solitary walks, or in chatting with a number of village gossips whose 
acquaintance he had cultivated. " 

"What, then, would you counsel?" 

"That we make for the keep. James's, Evening News, Standard, Echo, and any 
others that occur to you. " 

"Very well, sir. " 

The landlord gave a very visible start. " 

"Very good, very good," said Holmes, smiling. 

"It's up to you, young fellah, to name the lake," said he. 

"I repeated it as I had told it before. "The police are already upstairs. 
Postmark, London, S. W. Date, July 7. Hum!  Man's thumb-mark on 
corner,--probably postman. Best quality paper. Envelopes at sixpence a packet. 
Particular man in his stationery. No address. " He chuckled to himself as he 
spoke, his eyes twinkled, and he seemed a different man to the sombre thinker 
of the previous night. I had said nothing to my wife until I missed the paper 
this morning. That night, on the advice of the manager of the hotel, I 
communicated with the police, and next morning we advertised in all the papers. 
My end is that the crime was committed half an hour earlier than reported; that 
Mrs. I travelled in my youth, took to the stage, and finally became a reporter 
on an evening paper in London. " 

"Upon what point?" 

"In your heart of hearts, do you think that Neville is alive?" 

Sherlock Holmes seemed to be embarrassed by the question. He had handed me the 
key, and with a happy thought I took it with me lest he should lock himself in. 
Some day, perchance, in joust or in tourney, knight may wish to wear my colors, 
and then I shall tell him that if he does indeed crave my favor there is wrong 
unredressed, and the wronger the Socman of Minstead. Further out still lay a 
great merchant-ship, high ended, deep waisted, painted of a canary yellow, and 
towering above the fishing-boats like a swan among ducklings. By his black robe 
and the eight-pointed cross upon his sleeve, Alleyne recognized him as one of 
the Knights Hospitallers of St. It is said that there are four-score thousand 
men behind the King of Spain, with Du Guesclin and all the best lances of 
France, who have sworn to shed their heart's blood ere this Pedro come again to 
the throne. Abe Slaney, Elriges Farm, East Ruston, Norfolk. " 

"If Elsie dies, I care nothing what becomes of me," said the American. His 
appearance had changed for the worse during the few hours that I had been with 
him. His dress was quiet and sombre--a black frock-coat, dark trousers, and a 
touch of color about his necktie. As to what it was he feared, we can only 
deduce that by considering the formidable letters which were received by 
himself and his successors. Out of fifteen symbols in the first message, four 
were the same, so it was reasonable to set this down as E. Never had the sight 
of unexpected death caused our hearts to stop and then throb so wildly as did 
this amazing indication of life. We have known each other since we were little 
children, and I know his faults as no one else does; but he is too 
tender-hearted to hurt a fly. Somehow we gathered up a chair upon our way, and 
bounded on with it towards the street. My mouth was full of  his beard, our 
arms were locked, our bodies intertwined, and that infernal chair radiated its 
legs all round us. Surely, if its bole exceeded that of all others, its height 
must do the same. If the rim of the plateau was indeed the highest point, then 
why should this mighty tree not prove to be a watchtower which commanded the 
whole country?  Now, ever since I ran wild as a lad in Ireland I have been a 
bold and skilled tree-climber. " 

"Nay, my fair lord," Aylward answered with a grin, "it is violence which is 
offered to a man. Michael, as that upon the right is of St. Remi. There, too, 
above the poop of yonder nief, you see the towers of Saint Croix and of Pey 
Berland. Thence I saw him at once. Finally he drove round to the Charing Cross 
telegraph office, sent off a message, and then, at last, we made for Baker 
Street once more. It was evening when he at last climbed down, with a final 
assurance that he would keep the Indians till next morning. 

"There must be no mistake," said Holmes, looking round at him. ' 

"'Wonderful!' he cried, with his hands up. The only conceivable escape for him 
lay in silencing my tongue. 











"It's Just the very Biggest Thing in the World" 

Hardly was it shut when Mrs. It was a quiet, little, plainly furnished room, 
with a round table in the centre, on which several German books were scattered. 
He started in his little yacht for Norway just before the warrant was issued 
for his arrest. Now his practical Scotch intelligence brought him back with a 
snap to the matter in hand. They are, as I understand, the vital ones. So did 
I, but I got in three carriages behind them. But we are honor bound to go back 
and have them out or see it through with them. To his north would be Flanders 
and the country of the Eastlanders and of the Muscovites. That night he sat up 
with his gun and kept watch and ward. He it is who stirs up strife, and forever 
blows the dying embers into flame. "You're a man to be proud of," he said. It's 
deeper. 

The salesman nodded and shot a questioning glance at my companion. 

Holmes smiled at the compliment. " 

"But Calais?" 

"Calais too. 

"Can I be of avail?" asked Alleyne. Later, I served under the Warden of 
Berwick, that very John Copeland of whom our friend spake, the same who held 
the King of Scots to ransom. Ma foi! it is rough soldiering, and a good school 
for one who would learn to be hardy and war-wise. I would as soon take 
Beelzebub himself to my arms. But you are a man of action--you are a man of 
affairs. Do not dream of going, Watson, for I very much prefer having a 
witness, if only as a check to my own memory. It is all dark to me. But there 
is, if you will excuse my saying so, something just a little funny about it. 
With my face over the brink, I saw him fall for a long way. It looks untidy, 
does it not, sir?" 

I moved my head to look at the cabinet behind me. Here it is. All the time, 
however, I never lost sight of my purpose. We slept in a double-bedded room, 
which was the best that the little country inn could do for us. When it cleared 
again the place was a shambles. " She raised up a panel which was leaning 
against the wall, and showed a rude painting of a scraggy and angular fowl, 
with very long legs and a spotted body. 

"Dead?  Did you say he was dead?" 

"Yes, sir, he is dead. McMurdo, who had already been appointed Inner Deacon, 
with every prospect of some day succeeding McGinty as Bodymaster, was now so 
necessary to the councils of his comrades that nothing was done without his 
help and advice. Baldwin?" 

The young men nodded in surly fashion to each other. 

"Maybe Miss Ettie has told you how it is with us?" said Baldwin. I leave my 
estate, with all its advantages and all its disadvantages, to my brother, your 
father, whence it will, no doubt, descend to you. " 

"Yes, yes: someone has passed along," said Holmes, stooping over the grass 
border. "I can make nothing of it," said he. " 

"These are the records of your early work, then?" I asked. I have no doubt that 
my friend's explanation will cover the facts. I endeavoured to apologize for 
the accident, but it was evident that these books which I had so unfortunately 
maltreated were very precious objects in the eyes of their owner. My only 
desire is to help the law in every possible way. No reply. I remember that as I 
dropped off to sleep my last recollection was that Challenger was squatting, 
like a monstrous bull-frog, by the fire, his huge head in his hands, sunk 
apparently in the deepest thought, and entirely oblivious to the good-night 
which I wished him. There I squatted down and awaited developments. 

"Well, I waited until the road was clear--it is never a very frequented one at 
any time, I fancy--and then I clambered over the fence into the grounds. 

"He disappeared upon the 3d of December, 1878,--nearly ten years ago. 'It seems 
a pity, but I have done what I could. You stand in the way not merely of an 
individual, but of a mighty organization, the full extent of which you, with 
all your cleverness, have been unable to realize. How many landsmen are there 
who would drink rum when they could get these other spirits? Yes, I was certain 
it was a seaman. How the Army made the Passage of Roncesvalles XXXIV. " 

"And your father? Did you tell him?" 

"Yes; and he seemed to think, with me, that something had happened, and that I 
should hear of Hosmer again. 

"Quite so. The box was the same which now lies open upon your table. Sherlock 
Holmes, I have been struck by the difficulty which I have experienced in 
picking out examples which shall in every way answer my purpose. The look of 
anger passed in an instant from his face. " 

He smiled serenely. I had observed some newspaper comment at the time, but I 
was exceedingly preoccupied by that little affair of the Vatican cameos, and in 
my anxiety to oblige the Pope I lost touch with several interesting English 
cases. " 

"But why should you wish to go into so horrible a place?" 

"Well, you see the hills beyond? They are really islands cut off on all sides 
by the impassable mire, which has crawled round them in the course of years. 
"We have but to pass through the abbey grounds, along the armory wall, past the 
church of St. "  There, sure enough, just behind where we had been standing, 
stuck one of those murderous darts which we knew so well. " 

"A thing like a cleaver," said he. 

"Well, what do YOU make of it?" 

"That it was written in a train. I have written to Lestrade asking him to 
supply us with the details which are now wanting, and which he will only get 
after he had secured his man. " 

I could see that Holmes was favourably impressed by the manner and speech of 
his new client. 

"I think," said he, "that we shall be of more use in London than in Norbury. He 
had a large blue envelope in his hand, and was evidently the bearer of a 
message. One thing led to another, and it ended in his inviting me out to spend 
a few days at his house, Wisteria Lodge, between Esher and Oxshott. 

"That should give them heart," said Sir Nigel, eyeing the galleys, which crept 
along on either side, with a slow, measured swing of their great oars, the 
water swirling and foaming under their sharp stems. " 

"Eh? What was that?" 

"I say that I have solved it. Mortimer. "A glance at our friend here reveals 
the rounded head of the Celt, which carries inside it the Celtic enthusiasm and 
power of attachment. " 

"How is the betting?" 

"Well, that is the curious part of it. " 

"The first three sensible words that you have uttered since you entered this 
room, Watson. " 

"Exactly. " 

"Well, I suppose you mean well, and I do thank you," said McMurdo in no very 
gracious manner. "You must act, man, or you are lost. You have asked me if I 
know the name of the assassin. " 

"Why don't you say some yourself?" the child asked, with wondering eyes. All 
the afternoon he sat in the stalls wrapped in the most perfect happiness, 
gently waving his long, thin fingers in time to the music, while his gently 
smiling face and his languid, dreamy eyes were as unlike those of Holmes the 
sleuth-hound, Holmes the relentless, keen-witted, ready-handed criminal agent, 
as it was possible to conceive. Here were the gold mullets of the Pakingtons, 
the sable and ermine of the Mackworths, the scarlet bars of the Wakes, the gold 
and blue of the Grosvenors, the cinque-foils of the Cliftons, the annulets of 
the Musgraves, the silver pinions of the Beauchamps, the crosses of the 
Molineaux, the bloody chevron of the Woodhouses, the red and silver of the 
Worsleys, the swords of the Clarks, the boars'-heads of the Lucies, the 
crescents of the Boyntons, and the wolf and dagger of the Lipscombs. On the dog 
raced through sawdust and shavings, down an alley, round a passage, between two 
wood-piles, and finally, with a triumphant yelp, sprang upon a large barrel 
which still stood upon the hand-trolley on which it had been brought. On the 
other hand a wild chaos of boulders and debris made all advance impossible. 
This malignant and terrible contortion, combined with the low forehead, blunt 
nose, and prognathous jaw gave the dead man a singularly simious and ape-like 
appearance, which was increased by his writhing, unnatural posture. Over the 
fireplace was a magnificent trophy of weapons, one of which had been used on 
that tragic night. 









The whole vast plain of Gascony and of Languedoc is an arid and profitless 
expanse in winter save where the swift-flowing Adour and her snow-fed 
tributaries, the Louts, the Oloron and the Pau, run down to the sea of Biscay. 
" 

"Then there is a lake in the center. Briefly, Watson, I am in the midst of a 
very remarkable inquiry, and I have hoped to find a clue in the incoherent 
ramblings of these sots, as I have done before now. Had I been recognised in 
that den my life would not have been worth an hour's purchase; for I have used 
it before now for my own purposes, and the rascally Lascar who runs it has 
sworn to have vengeance upon me. " She shook her clenched white hand as she 
spoke, and her lips tightened ominously. These Americans were well advised. 
Both cases decided, Dr. 

"It was on that," said Professor Challenger, pointing to this tree, "that the 
pterodactyl was perched. "Why should I not? And yet I hate to think of this old 
scandal gaining a new lease of life. "Consider that the poison was so virulent 
that even a man who is as strong as an ox and has not a nerve in his body, like 
Malone here, could hardly get up the stairs before he fell unconscious. Is it 
likely that anyone could stand seventeen minutes of it, far less hours?" 

"Unless someone saw it coming and made preparation, same as old friend 
Challenger did. " 

"Now, you will observe that he could not have been on the staff of the 
hospital, since only a man well-established in a London practice could hold 
such a position, and such a one would not drift into the country. He turned, 
however, at the sound of their hoofs, and it was clear that his blindness was a 
cheat like all the rest of him, for he ran swiftly through a field and so into 
a wood, where none could follow him. He had remained on that three-foot path, 
with sheer wall on one side and sheer drop on the other, until his enemy had 
overtaken him. When we brought our launch alongside he was so firmly anchored 
that it was only by throwing the end of a rope over his shoulders that we were 
able to haul him out, and to drag him, like some evil fish, over our side. I 
could read all that in the dust; and I could read that as he walked he grew 
more and more excited. Holmes. It opened on to a squalid courtyard. This long 
screw would have transfixed it and drawn it up with a single pull. This 
explanation of deficiencies or abnormalities you will kindly accept. That's an 
art which every detective should be an expert at. But then, when the man 
commits burglary in order to break images which are not his own, that brings it 
away from the doctor and on to the policeman. " 

The Bodymaster's scowl relaxed as he listened to the humble words. You remember 
that terrible murderer, Bert Stevens, who wanted us to get him off in '87? Was 
there ever a more mild-mannered, Sunday-school young man?" 

"It is true. Sherlock Holmes, for we are both brain-workers. " 

"What about your government and all this treatment?" said Holmes, tapping the 
valise. " 

"So we have contracted our field of search to a large book, printed in double 
columns and in common use. It will not be long before he comes. That's the 
situation, so far as I could follow it. But I've served 'im ten years, and I'm 
fond of 'im, and, mind you, 'e's a great man, when all's said an' done, and 
it's an honor to serve 'im. I have always held, too, that pistol practice 
should be distinctly an open-air pastime; and when Holmes, in one of his queer 
humors, would sit in an arm-chair with his hair-trigger and a hundred Boxer 
cartridges, and proceed to adorn the opposite wall with a patriotic V. If the 
cottage is now permanently deserted we may have some difficulty. We'll get him 
in. If ever he gets out alive--well, he can talk of Birdy Edwards's luck for 
the rest of his days!" 

"There's going to be a vacancy at Pinkerton's or I'm mistaken. If it is 
to-morrow we shall be more ready still. "It would cease to be a danger if we 
could define it," said he. " 

He hammered loudly at the knocker and pulled at the bell, but without any 
success. Joseph Stangerson. " 







Adventure XI. "I thought I'd dodge your British law; for I was not sure how I 
stood under it, and also I saw my chance to throw these hounds once for all off 
my track. I have already looked into the matter, and have come, as I think, 
within sight of my solution. I must have been unconscious for a few minutes, 
for when I came to myself, I found that they had torn down the bell-rope, and 
had secured me tightly to the oaken chair which stands at the head of the 
dining-table. " As he spoke, he threw into the vessel a few white crystals, and 
then added some drops of a transparent fluid. Some of the blows of my cane came 
home and roused its snakish temper, so that it flew upon the first person it 
saw. I was among these last, but my term was not for life. " 

"To such base uses do we come," said Lord John, smiling. It was evident that a 
chisel or strong knife had been thrust in, and the lock forced back with it. 
Holmes picked up several of them and examined them carefully. I'll pledge my 
word there was no mark on it yesterday. "There has been murder done, and the 
murderer was a man. It was there that he kept his hound and there also he had 
made preparations so that he might have a refuge. He was clad in a dark suit, 
and I saw that he had a black beard. Putting out my hand I felt several coats 
hanging from the wall, and I understood that I was in a passage. 

"And all in four years, Baron. 

"It is no doubt a curious formation," said I "but I am not geologist enough to 
say that it is wonderful. 

"It is cut off this," said Dr. Long ere Alleyne was out of sound of the 
Beaulieu bells he was striding sturdily along, swinging his staff and whistling 
as merrily as the birds in the thicket. Here and there tossed the white plume 
of the English helmet, rising and falling like the foam upon a wave, with the 
fierce gleam and sparkle ever circling round it until at last it had sunk from 
view, and another brave man had turned from war to peace. Rucastle's. He knew 
he was safe with her; but when there was a chance of a husband coming forward, 
who would ask for all that the law would give him, then her father thought it 
time to put a stop on it. 

"Well, Mr. 

"'Almost immediately after you left. "I had a presentiment that you would come 
this evening. We have never gone out without keeping a sharp watch, and no one 
could have escaped our notice. A few country carts were stirring, bearing in 
vegetables to the metropolis, but the lines of villas on either side were as 
silent and lifeless as some city in a dream. ' There had been no robbery, nor 
is there any evidence as to how the man met his death. I gave her a check, and 
I never thought any more of the matter. C. is as he was made and couldn't help 
himself. "I was hoping that if the paper on which he wrote was thin, some trace 
of it might come through upon this polished surface. 

"But he is right. " 

"Close to your hand then. "This outer one is for the letters, the inner one for 
the figures. I don't mind how I get on. Gregson to run you down in London while 
I examined Wisteria Lodge. I stared in silence at Sherlock Holmes, whose lips 
were compressed and his brows drawn down over his eyes. I was so sure of it 
that for years I have been terrified if ever he came home later than was 
expected. I will endeavour, therefore, to condescend to their limitation and to 
indicate the situation by the use of a homely analogy which will be within the 
limits of the intelligence of your readers. I will explain the state of things 
to you, as far as I have been able to understand it, in a very few words. " 

"It was a trick," cried John. " 

"Had he a whip in his hand?" 

"A whip--no. "His wife tells us that the knife had lain upon the 
dressing-table, and that he had picked it up as he left the room. " 

Sherlock Holmes shrugged his shoulders. " 

"Where, then, is my wife?" 

"That is a detail which I shall speedily supply. " 

"Did you not? That's good impartial evidence, ain't it? Well, his death came in 
uncommon handy for you, or they would have had you for shoving the queer. 

"Well, really, it can hardly be described as otherwise," said Sherlock Holmes, 
smiling at my surprise. It seldom is in such cases. So he says, but he had been 
two hours in the public-house, and it is some distance from the road to the 
window. Come back to this lady in a year, and may her future and yours justify 
us in the judgment which we have pronounced this night!" 







THE ADVENTURE OF THE SECOND STAIN 



I had intended "The Adventure of the Abbey Grange" to be the last of those 
exploits of my friend, Mr. " 

"Nought to wager!" cried the soldier. Obviously something had occurred during 
the morning, then, to cause her to change her mind. What could that something 
be? She could not have spoken to anyone when she was out, for she had been in 
the company of the bridegroom. He who carries himself best of the victors hath 
the prize, and he who is judged best of the other party hath a jewelled clasp. 
Something of his birth place seemed to cling to the man, and I never looked at 
his pale, keen face or the poise of his head without associating him with gray 
archways and mullioned windows and all the venerable wreckage of a feudal keep. 
The summit showed every sign of a luxuriant vegetation, with bushes near the 
edge, and farther back many high trees. It was one of those small sealing-wax 
knives to be found on old-fashioned writing-tables, with an ivory handle and a 
stiff blade. It is equally clear that his enemies, lying in wait for him near 
your door, mistook your husband for him in the foggy morning light. " 

"I have heard nothing of it. 









To the south of Pampeluna in the kingdom of Navarre there stretched a high 
table-land, rising into bare, sterile hills, brown or gray in color, and strewn 
with huge boulders of granite. His appearance was glorious. I am sure that his 
top-hat, had I ever ventured to don it, would have slipped over me entirely and 
rested on my shoulders. Have you endeavoured to trace any of the securities 
here mentioned?" 

"Inquiries are now being made at the offices, but I fear that the complete 
register of the stockholders of these South American concerns is in South 
America, and that some weeks must elapse before we can trace the shares. Paul! 
come what may, I must be upon the homeward road ere mid-day. "There are in it 
twenty-three marks, one noble, three shillings and fourpence, which is a great 
treasure for one man to carry. Why should he? Is the water always turbid?" 

"Generally about this colour. One thing I swear to you, and that is that when I 
wrote the letter I never dreamed of any harm to the old gentleman, who had been 
my kindest friend. James Desmond, who is the next heir, is an elderly gentleman 
of a very amiable disposition, so that this persecution does not arise from 
him. My father was absent from home at the time of my arrival, and I was 
informed by the maid that he had driven over to Ross with John Cobb, the groom. 
The high object of our mission, the consciousness that it was unselfish and 
chivalrous, the villainous character of our opponent, all added to the sporting 
interest of the adventure. She stood fearlessly in front of him, still stroking 
her bird; but twice she threw a swift questioning glance over her shoulder, as 
one who is in search of aid. All the way there every man I met seemed to me to 
be a policeman or a detective; and, for all that it was a cold night, the sweat 
was pouring down my face before I came to the Brixton Road. Silver clearings 
and the black patches of the bushes--nothing else could I see. Then from out of 
the silence, imminent and threatening, there came once more that low, throaty 
croaking, far louder and closer than before. " 

"He was rattled and bustled by meeting this other fellow. "Should you come to 
Norwich you may have cause to remember that you have been of service to 
Alderman Micheldene. 

"I suppose you realize, Mr. Later, I served under the Warden of Berwick, that 
very John Copeland of whom our friend spake, the same who held the King of 
Scots to ransom. Ma foi! it is rough soldiering, and a good school for one who 
would learn to be hardy and war-wise. Shoot, mes garcons, or you will be too 
late. " 

The throng of pirates had cleared away from the great wooden catapult, leaving 
two of their number to discharge it. "I have already heard of your meeting with 
Mrs. 

A look of annoyance passed over Holmes's face. He had himself, in reply to a 
question, confirmed Stamford's opinion upon that point. 

Twice already in his career had Holmes helped him to attain success, his own 
sole reward being the intellectual joy of the problem. 

"Good! and Gregson can come inside with me. They would have had us share their 
caves with them, but Lord John would by no means consent to it considering that 
to do so would put us in their power if they were treacherously disposed. The 
major was raving about his losses. So much is clear to me. My husband found and 
kept both diary and letters. I shall look forward to seeing you again this 
afternoon. I am not at home. The answer was conclusive. Ere the sun had sunk 
again he was dead, and I the prisoner of Sir John Chandos. 

Fiercely he strove to disengage his weapon, but Hordle John bent his arm slowly 
back until, with a sharp crack, like a breaking stave, it turned limp in his 
grasp, and the mace dropped from the nerveless fingers. The place was 
brilliantly lighted, and the huge, heavily gilt mirrors upon every wall 
reflected and multiplied the garish illumination. A SCANDAL IN BOHEMIA 

I. 

The Christchurch townsfolk stood huddled about the Bridge of Avon, the women 
pulling tight their shawls and the men swathing themselves in their gaberdines, 
while down the winding path from the castle came the van of the little army, 
their feet clanging on the hard, frozen road. We tore away his collar, and 
Holmes breathed a prayer of gratitude when we saw that there was no sign of a 
wound and that the rescue had been in time. The attempt, whatever it may be, is 
to come off, we will say, before one o'clock. We were only doing our duty in 
taking this chance of putting him back where he could do no harm. Something 
rushed out at us and my heart sprang into my mouth, but I could have laughed 
when I realized that it was the cat. " 

"What was that?" 

"That is a private matter. "  I condensed into a few sentences the Professor's 
narrative. " 

"He is indeed, sire. I only kept them here until my friend, Mr. King, the cook, 
again. When you said that, did you mean that it seemed to you to be louder than 
the second one?" 

"Well, sir, it wakened me from my sleep, so it is hard to judge. The idea of 
using her as a decoy was clearly already in his mind, though he may not have 
been certain how the details of his plot were to be arranged. I crept down the 
passage as noiselessly as I could and peeped round the corner of the door. " 

"Why, it is just such a chance as you have been longing for. There can be no 
question, my dear Watson, of the value of exercise before breakfast. 

This brought the lecturer to the great ladder of animal life, beginning low 
down in molluscs and feeble sea creatures, then up rung by rung through 
reptiles and fishes, till at last we came to a kangaroo-rat, a creature which 
brought forth its young alive, the direct ancestor of all mammals, and 
presumably, therefore, of everyone in the audience. Holmes. I prayed, as I 
walked back along the gray, lonely road, that my friend might soon be freed 
from his preoccupations and able to come down to take this heavy burden of 
responsibility from my shoulders. 

"There are hardly any data," he remarked. Holmes, I thought you knew things," 
said he. 

"When we were taking coffee in the drawing-room that night after dinner, I told 
Arthur and Mary my experience, and of the precious treasure which we had under 
our roof, suppressing only the name of my client. In my aching head the one 
thought was throbbing that there really was truth in this man's story, that it 
was of tremendous consequence, and that it would work up into inconceivable 
copy for the Gazette when I could obtain permission to use it. Everything 
prospered in the strange settlement. A few years' skulking like jackals among 
the graves of the human race and then our belated and lonely end would come. It 
never recovered from the blow, and much of my capital was irretrievably 
swallowed up. " She raised her veil as she spoke, and we could see that she was 
indeed in a pitiable state of agitation, her face all drawn and grey, with 
restless frightened eyes, like those of some hunted animal. I tried it when I 
came to Croydon, and we kept on until about two months ago, when we had to 
part. At first they were of a mind to let him enter the house and to kill him 
as a detected burglar; but they argued that if they were mixed up in an inquiry 
their own identity would at once be publicly disclosed and they would be open 
to further attacks. At the second glance, however, I perceived that there was a 
man standing in the Southampton Road, a small bearded man in a grey suit, who 
seemed to be looking in my direction. " 

"Absolutely!" said I. Holmes had been buried in the morning papers all the way 
down, but after we had passed the Hampshire border he threw them down and began 
to admire the scenery. "He is his own master, and would act as his own judgment 
directed. At the same time, he would naturally feel loyalty towards the 
officials who were working on the same case, and he would not conceal from them 
anything which would help them in bringing a criminal to justice. 

"Too late, Watson, too late!" cried Holmes, as I ran panting to his side. 

"I don't know, sir," answered the woman who had opened the door; "I only know 
that he drove away with the gentleman in a carriage. 

"I've had a plain-clothes man waiting at the station all the week. Baynes?" 

"Highly honoured, sir, I am sure. With a slow smile he drew a folded and 
discoloured scrap of paper from his pocket. So engrossed was he with his 
occupation that he appeared to have forgotten our presence, for he chattered 
away to himself under his breath the whole time, keeping up a running fire of 
exclamations, groans, whistles, and little cries suggestive of encouragement 
and of hope. 

In spite of the danger from dinosaurs (which is not great save at night, for, 
as I may have said before, they are mostly nocturnal in their habits) I have 
twice in the last three weeks been over to our old camp in order to see our 
negro who still kept watch and ward below the cliff. 

"Well, I won't see him, Staples. He faced us as we assembled for breakfast with 
a deprecating false modesty in his eyes, as who should say, "I know that I 
deserve all that you can say, but I pray you to spare my blushes by not saying 
it. He did not wish to put his head in a halter. Then, crouching down, he 
rested the end of the barrel upon the ledge of the open window, and I saw his 
long moustache droop over the stock and his eye gleam as it peered along the 
sights. Now, if you cared to apply, Mr. Had this test been invented, there are 
hundreds of men now walking the earth who would long ago have paid the penalty 
of their crimes. " She shook her clenched white hand as she spoke, and her lips 
tightened ominously. The father was away in search of his son. He came of the 
old masterful Baskerville strain and was the very image, they tell me, of the 
family picture of old Hugo. He sits motionless, like a spider in the center of 
its web, but that web has a thousand radiations, and he knows well every quiver 
of each of them. Now she tiptoed forward and laid her hand lightly upon his 
bended shoulders. Take the message also, Watson, that we may check each other. 
" 

There is little more to tell. You have been of material assistance to me. 2. 
You put chalk there when you play billiards, to steady the cue. " 

Familiar as I was with my friend's methods, it was not difficult for me to 
follow his deductions, and to observe the untidiness of attire, the sheaf of 
legal papers, the watch-charm, and the breathing which had prompted them. 
Summerlee and I laughed so that we could hardly help him. 

Mr. Some might say one thing and some another, just as one bowman loves the 
yew, and a second will not shoot save with the ash. From the heavy wooden 
rafters which formed the roof there hung rows of hooks which held up sides of 
bacon, joints of smoked beef, and strings of onions for winter use. I thought 
of it by day and I nursed it by night. When our unknown had followed 
Baskerville home we should have had the opportunity of playing his own game 
upon himself and seeing where he made for. 

"'D'you mean to say those are mine?' he cried. ' 

"'Absolute and complete silence before, during, and after? No reference to the 
matter at all, either in word or writing?' 

"'I have already given you my word. Something was moving in the shadow of the 
tool-house. , something of Don Quixote, and yet again something which was the 
essence of the English country gentleman, the keen, alert, open-air lover of 
dogs and of horses. , lunch 2s. "This is not quite correct, however," he added, 
glancing over the document. I had no idea that the paymaster was such a rascal, 
though I have long had an eye upon him. I never minted a dollar in my life. 

"'Listen to me, Sahib,' said the taller and fiercer of the pair, the one whom 
they called Abdullah Khan. " 

"Really, there should be some limits to human folly!" cried Summerlee in a 
positive fury. 

"He still carried the heavy stick which the mother described him as having with 
him when he followed Drebber. If I could lie low for a while and then get away 
where I could be joined by my 'widow' we should have a chance at last of living 
in peace for the rest of our lives. " 

"By my hilt! the good dame speaks truth," said Aylward. 

"I am at a loss to know, sir," he said, "what you can have to speak about which 
affects me personally in a very intimate fashion. McFarlane's guilt definitely 
established. Advise you to abandon case. LESTRADE. You know me too well to 
think that I am boasting when I say that I shall either confirm or destroy his 
theory by means which he is quite incapable of employing, or even of 
understanding. " 

"But what is the good of all these vague theories," cried the banker 
impatiently, "when I have told you that I saw Arthur with the coronet in his 
hands?" 

"Wait a little, Mr. The son, as far as he knew, was in Bristol. 

"We need not hurry ourselves, Watson. "The house seems deserted. Do you think 
it could not stretch from here to Philadelphia or New York?" 

"Well, then, to the West, or to England, or to Germany, where father came 
from--anywhere to get away from this Valley of Fear!" 

McMurdo thought of old Brother Morris. " 

"Lord Robert St. I have felt like one of those poor rabbits when the snake is 
writhing towards it. There was no movement. Just beyond it is a nice little 
grove of Scotch firs, and I used to be very fond of strolling down there, for 
trees are always a neighborly kind of things. I could even tell that they had 
been disturbed, for the woman had run back swiftly to the door, as was shown by 
the deep toe and light heel marks, while Wooden-leg had waited a little, and 
then had gone away. '" 

He shook his head sadly. "I glanced over it," said he. 

"Fill up your stoups!" cried Black Simon, thrusting his own goblet into the 
open hogshead in front of him. It reminds me of the circumstances attendant on 
the death of Van Jansen, in Utrecht, in the year '34. She is to be married in a 
fortnight to the Earl of Dovercourt. 

"Well?" she cried, "well?" And then, seeing that there were two of us, she gave 
a cry of hope which sank into a groan as she saw that my companion shook his 
head and shrugged his shoulders. Challenger. He is making notes and consulting 
books at the central table, as calmly as if years of placid work lay before 
him. I could hardly keep from smiling at his crestfallen face when he finally 
snapped the case to and handed it back. Cubitt's body may now be removed. I 
suppose, Doctor, you have not recovered the bullet which wounded the lady?" 

"A serious operation will be necessary before that can be done. I don't know 
what I did. " 

"But of the things of this world, what have you gathered from your reading? 
From this high window you may catch a glimpse over the wooden point and the 
smoke of Bucklershard of the mouth of the Exe, and the shining sea. If my own 
servant could not believe my innocence, how could I hope to make it good before 
twelve foolish tradesmen in a jury-box?  Lal Chowdar and I disposed of the body 
that night, and within a few days the London papers were full of the mysterious 
disappearance of Captain Morstan. Holmes ain't here, then Mr. Let no regard for 
your client's interests keep you silent, for I assure you that his interests, 
if he would only see it, would be best served by taking me into his complete 
confidence. " 

There were two rough-haired, unkempt horses in the tumble-down stable. " 

"But I understand that it is something more modern and practical upon which you 
wish to consult me?" 

"Most modern. At Sir Nigel's words he started violently, and his swarthy 
features blanched to a livid gray. " 

Holmes was curiously distrait, and we walked up and down the garden path for 
some time in silence. I had brought a pack of cards in my pocket, and I thought 
that, as we were a partie carrée, you might have your rubber after all. " 

Lord St. " He took a little bone the size of a bean out of a pill-box. This 
man's occupation is gone. 

"Your Majesty has something which I should value even more highly," said 
Holmes. The purchase will be completed in a week, and meanwhile you will remain 
in Birmingham and make yourself useful. I found that the key was indeed his, 
that he had entered my room to know if I wanted tea, and that he had very 
carelessly left the key in the door when he came out. I had almost decided upon 
this, when he solved the problem for me. Do you stay here, and the odds are 
that you will see me again in an hour or two. Yes, I do, though. " 

"That painting was by Jean Baptiste Greuze. He was off like a shot and got 
clean away. On an emergency he could keep the hound in the out-house at 
Merripit, but it was always a risk, and it was only on the supreme day, which 
he regarded as the end of all his efforts, that he dared do it. What is there 
for us to do?" 

"To act, Sherlock--to act!" cried Mycroft, springing to his feet. "It was my 
vow and must be done. Listen to this: 'Lost, on the 9th inst. Holmes. 

"Ask Lady Hilda Trelawney Hope if she will be kind enough to step up," said he. 

"'No good can ever come of falsehood, mother,' she said. It was a rude, raw, 
primeval version of the Jews in Babylon or the Israelites in Egypt. It struck 
me that he was looking even paler and thinner than usual. When you have been a 
year with the Company you will think less of such matters. James's Hall I felt 
that an evil time might be coming upon those whom he had set himself to hunt 
down. Sherlock Holmes stopped at a door some little distance from the Carlton, 
and, cautioning me not to speak, he led the way into the hall. " 

"I can hardly think that you would find many decent citizens to agree with 
you," I answered. He is also the one among us who is endowed with that Celtic 
temperament which would make him sensitive to such impressions. 

"Sir Henry Baskerville is upstairs expecting you," said the clerk. I have to 
begin my report by bad news, for the first serious personal trouble (I pass 
over the incessant bickerings between the Professors) occurred this evening, 
and might have had a tragic ending. On Wednesday it was still unfinished, so I 
hammered away until Friday--that is, yesterday. A strangely opposed pair they 
appeared as they approached each other: Tranter dark and stout and stiff, with 
hairy chest and corded arms, Alleyne a model of comeliness and grace, with his 
golden hair and his skin as fair as a woman's. Up the broad steps Alleyne went, 
still following his boyish guide, until at the folding oak doors the latter 
paused, and ushered him into the main hall of the castle. 

On entering the room the clerk looked round; but, seeing no one, he continued 
to stand, his cap in his hand, examining with the greatest interest a chamber 
which was so different to any to which he was accustomed. My work there is but 
half finished. 

"At last, one evening I was driving up and down Torquay Terrace, as the street 
was called in which they boarded, when I saw a cab drive up to their door. " 

"I will make no allowance. " 

Holmes turned over the leaves of the book upon his knee. 

"Surely," said he, with something of the air of a clinical professor expounding 
to his class. "When the rest are in, you see one or two shiverin' on the bank, 
envyin' the others that have taken the plunge. I must, of course, claim the 
protection of the embassy for the others. " 

A heavy step was heard upon the stairs, and an instant later there entered a 
tall, ruddy, clean-shaven gentleman, whose clear eyes and florid cheeks told of 
a life led far from the fogs of Baker Street. " 

"I must go home now, for dad is very ill, and he misses me so if I leave him. 
The crime committed, they quarrelled as to who had actually struck the fatal 
blow, and amused one another and the company by describing the cries and 
contortions of the murdered man. The second time we asked ten thousand, but it 
was three days before we could come to terms, and I am of opinion myself that 
we might have done better by plundering the palace. I might, it is true, have 
reversed my boots, as I have done on similar occasions, but the sight of three 
sets of tracks in one direction would certainly have suggested a deception. " 



The development for which my friend had asked came in a quicker and an 
infinitely more tragic form than he could have imagined. But how on earth do 
you deduce that the gas is not laid on in his house?" 

"One tallow stain, or even two, might come by chance; but when I see no less 
than five, I think that there can be little doubt that the individual must be 
brought into frequent contact with burning tallow--walks upstairs at night 
probably with his hat in one hand and a guttering candle in the other. " 

"What is it all?" I asked, when I had got my breath. "For dear Christ's sake, 
my fair lord," he cried in a crackling voice, "I have at my belt a bag with a 
hundred rose nobles, and I will give it to you freely if you will but pass your 
sword through this man's body. " 

"Nay, Bertrand, I fear it as little as you," said she. 

Sherlock Holmes gave a sigh of relief, and relaxed into a smile. 

Ne touchez pas, 

Ne coutez pas, 

Ne depechez pas. I drove along slowly, weighing in my own mind what it was best 
to do. I have it here and I will read it to you: 



"'The Copper Beeches, near Winchester. The assurance and jauntiness which 
generally marked his demeanour and dress were, however, wanting. Short as the 
two snips are, you can distinctly see the same slight curve in each. " 

The country detective chuckled. Holmes talks of signals," said Gregson. " 

"The fates are against you, Watson," said he, laughing. "You really are very 
fine indeed. " 

"You take my breath away!" 

"I found him in the hands of a faker, and took the liberty of running him just 
as he was sent over. No doubt you will go to the prison to see James. A white 
mantle fluttered behind him, upon the left side of which was marked the broad 
black cross picked out with silver which was the well-known badge of the 
Teutonic Order. Except these, the plover and the curlew are the only 
inhabitants until you come to the Chesterfield high road. There is a church 
there, you see, a few cottages, and an inn. Of these, one, the 'Lone Star,' 
instantly attracted my attention, since, although it was reported as having 
cleared from London, the name is that which is given to one of the states of 
the Union. Peculiarly rich in the coleoptera and in the lepidoptera, forty-six 
new species of the one and ninety-four of the other had been secured in the 
course of a few weeks. It was, however, in the larger animals, and especially 
in the larger animals supposed to have been long extinct, that the interest of 
the public was naturally centered. Hayes brought Arthur to his public-house, 
the Fighting Cock, where he was confined in an upper room, under the care of 
Mrs. Hayes, who is a kindly woman, but entirely under the control of her brutal 
husband. "We have been having a look at your horses, but I think I'll walk, 
after all. " 

"When that happy day comes," said Pedro, "then Spain shall be to you as 
Aquitaine, and, be your project what it may, you may ever count on every troop 
and every ship over which flies the banner of Castile. The squire, however, 
took no notice of their angry faces, but continued with his master's message. 
Its appearance and the dust upon the bottle showed that it was no common 
vintage which the murderers had enjoyed. Nearer and nearer came the two birds, 
all absorbed in their own contest, the stork wheeling upwards, the hawk still 
fluttering above it, until they were not a hundred paces from the camp. It was 
the scene of the murder. In Auvergne the maids are kind, but the wines are 
sour. Merryweather, we must put the screen over that dark lantern. He's a 
remarkable man, is young John Clay. " 

"'"What are we to do, then?" I asked. There is one predominant 'He' for all of 
them. 

"That you, Lestrade?" said Holmes. The rest is all dead o' thirst and hunger 
away down in the south. Is there a telegram for me?" 

"Yes, I opened it. Looked at more closely, I should certainly say that it was a 
curious case. " 

"Judging by its effect upon my brother, I should think it must be a most 
extraordinary one. " 

"What a pity we did not get the number!" 

"My dear Watson, clumsy as I have been, you surely do not seriously imagine 
that I neglected to get the number? No. It was a smart little landau which 
rattled up to the door of Briony Lodge. Ah, Watson, you have just come at the 
right time. " 

Twice she opened her lips, and twice no sound came from them. It is a wild 
night indoors, and what must it be in a stone hut upon the moor. His 
expression, his manner, his very soul seemed to vary with every fresh part that 
he assumed. Then to me, at least, there came back the cheering recollection of 
how twice since we had entered the room he had roared with laughter. It takes a 
muscular, energetic fellow, and one with a good set of teeth, to do that. All 
emotions, and that one particularly, were abhorrent to his cold, precise but 
admirably balanced mind. 

"One night he lost even more heavily than usual. Holmes, Cyril Morton, an 
electrical engineer, and we hope to be married at the end of the summer. But 
let us have it a little clearer if you can. Four of them carried him shoulder 
high, and he went like a Roman emperor. No wonder we found that poor Yankee's 
skeleton with the canes growin' between his ribs. What could be better for the 
purpose? Say again, then, Sahib, whether you are with us, or if we must look 
upon you as an enemy. There were two guides given us to start with, an oak and 
an elm. They all preserve, however, the common characteristics of barrenness, 
inhospitality, and misery. They talked together in whispers. No complaint had 
been lodged with the police, so that Beddoes had mistaken a threat for a deed. 
" He chuckled to himself as he spoke, his eyes twinkled, and he seemed a 
different man to the sombre thinker of the previous night. I see also in your 
open desk there that you have a sheet of stamps and a thick bundle of 
post-cards. " 

Summerlee, with a twisted smile, was about to make some fresh assault when Lord 
John hastened to intervene. But this is out of all reason. As our road lay the 
same way I thought that I would overtake you and introduce myself. The others, 
screaming and clawing, were thrust over the precipice, and went hurtling down, 
as their prisoners had of old, on to the sharp bamboos six hundred feet below. 
" 

"Pray compose yourself, sir," said Holmes, "and let me have a clear account of 
who you are and what it is that has befallen you. " 

"Aren't you?" The man's savage eyes were blazing with anger. " 

"The first three sensible words that you have uttered since you entered this 
room, Watson. He has been laid up with a hack, and once he slipped his 
knee-cap, but that was nothing. You entered by the window. All this country 
that I passed over to-night is as flat and clean as the palm of your hand, and 
the man we are following is no fool, as he very clearly showed to-night. Yet 
the white face and set expression of the young hunter showed that in his 
approach to the house he had seen enough to satisfy him upon that head. I knew 
this man Small had a certain degree of low cunning, but I did not think him 
capable of anything in the nature of delicate finesse. " 

"There you are," said Holmes, smiling. Behold the link with Brother Mycroft!" 

"He left Woolwich suddenly on Monday night. 

By this time the gas-bag had swollen to a goodly rotundity and was jerking 
strongly upon its lashings. It is very hot for the time of year; and I have had 
a good deal to worry and try me. When we parted she was a free woman, but I 
could never again be a free man. You remember that I wrote to Arthur upon that 
last day. " 

There was a brutal directness about his methods which made evasion difficult. " 

"But you shouldn't do it merely to please me. Holmes?" 

"I have a great fancy to see this lodger of yours, Mrs. Warren. He took out a 
ten-pound note, and he held it out to me then and there. Mr. Culverton Smith is 
a well-known resident of Sumatra, now visiting London. Dr. Mortimer is a most 
learned man in his own line. 

"I don't know much about the tariff and things of that kind," said he, "but it 
seems to me we've got a bit off the trail so far as that note is concerned. 

A hand-grip passed between the two. 

"Now then, Mr. I drove along slowly, weighing in my own mind what it was best 
to do. 

It was well that we had so clear a view of him. Barrymore is of interest to me. 
He stood in front of us now with the subdued manner of a well-trained servant. 

"He didn't mind me; in fact, he took a fancy to me, for at the time when he saw 
me first I was a youngster of twelve or so. I hope you'll prove worth it. When 
we got there we looked into that dreadful room. Well, in the next place, you 
will remember that this idea of someone moving in the garden, which took our 
attention for a moment from the real cause of the tragedy, emanated from him. " 
 He glared at me as the present representative of the beast. It is unused, save 
in time of war, and the key hangs from my poor lord and master's belt. There 
were no carpets and no signs of any furniture above the ground floor, while the 
plaster was peeling off the walls, and the damp was breaking through in green, 
unhealthy blotches. Among these had been Drebber and Stangerson; and no one 
knew whither they had gone. Rumour reported that Drebber had managed to convert 
a large part of his property into money, and that he had departed a wealthy 
man, while his companion, Stangerson, was comparatively poor. There was no clue 
at all, however, as to their whereabouts. Then, with four attendants, came the 
novice, her drooping head wreathed with white blossoms, and, behind, the abbess 
and her council of older nuns, who were already counting in their minds whether 
their own bailiff could manage the farms of Twynham, or whether a reeve would 
be needed beneath him, to draw the utmost from these new possessions which this 
young novice was about to bring them. " 

"What cable?" 

Carruthers took a telegram from his pocket "That's it," said he. " 

"You'll never persuade me to believe that. 

McGinty, who had been watching him narrowly, raised his thick black eyebrows. A 
sick man is but a child, and so I will treat you. It was thrown by a man who 
walked softly down the passage with a candle held in his hand. All emotions, 
and that one particularly, were abhorrent to his cold, precise but admirably 
balanced mind. 

"Are they not fresh and beautiful?" I cried with all the enthusiasm of a man 
fresh from the fogs of Baker Street. "Frank here and I met in '84, in McQuire's 
camp, near the Rockies, where pa was working a claim. We were engaged to each 
other, Frank and I; but then one day father struck a rich pocket and made a 
pile, while poor Frank here had a claim that petered out and came to nothing. " 

"Indeed, I have nothing more to tell. 

"We have here the explanation of why John Straker wished to take the horse out 
on to the moor. "I'll fight him with fists, or, if that won't satisfy him, I'll 
fight him any other way he chooses. 

"I must explain first," said McFarlane, "that I knew nothing of Mr. 

"I suppose that you would know him when you saw him?" asked Holmes. A minute 
later a carriage and engine could be seen flying along the open curve which 
leads to the station. 

"Well?" asked Von Bork eagerly, running forward to meet his visitor. "A lawyer, 
is he not, gray-headed, and walks with a limp?" 

"No, sir, this is Mr. I should say he is about the best-hated man in London. I 
have never denied him a wish. I had been told that if the King employed an 
agent it would certainly be you. " 

The unknown knight had sat like a statue of steel, looking neither to the right 
nor to the left during these preliminaries. "I should not have the impertinence 
to do it again after what you say. It would be as well, perhaps, for you to 
cross it. Simon has been thrown into the greatest consternation by the strange 
and painful episodes which have taken place in connection with his wedding. 

"Excuse me," he said, "but it is not my custom to discuss my most intimate 
personal affairs in this public manner. "What do you think of it, Watson?" 

"A masterpiece. But what end?  There is the great standing perennial problem to 
which human reason is as far from an answer as ever. 

"I knew him," she said. 

"Oh, no, Mr. "Don't tell me that _you_ have had one of these preposterous 
telegrams for oxygen?" 

I exhibited it. 

"Just the same old Teddy Marvin, at your service. "In your opinion there is a 
diabolical agency which makes Dartmoor an unsafe abode for a Baskerville--that 
is your opinion?" 

"At least I might go the length of saying that there is some evidence that this 
may be so. " 

"And richest?" 

"Well, they ought to be, but they've had a lawsuit for some years which has 
sucked the blood out of both of them, I fancy. 

One more little scene, and I have done. "I think, Miss Hunter, that we had 
better go in without you. I seem to remember flopping over by the step. The 
driver looked twice at such a shabby fare, but I jumped in before he could 
object. We all stopped to examine that monstrous spoor. He was an impetuous 
man, quick in his decisions. The eternal cigarette smouldered in his mouth. 
From the front window upon the left of the door there peeped a glimmer of a 
feeble light. That was why he broke prison, sir. Why should they give you 120 
pounds a year, when they could have their pick for 40 pounds? There must be 
some strong reason behind. Paul! I would be ill to please if I were not blithe 
to see the red roses flying at the head of so noble a following!" 

"The purse I have already given you, Edricson," continued the lady. And here is 
our boat, Sir Oliver, so it seems best to me that we should go to the abbey 
with our squires, leaving Master Hawtayne to have his own way in the unloading. 
" 

"I am armed. " 

"It is more than likely that the lake may be an old crater," said Summerlee. 

I was through it, when a sudden fantastic impulse came upon me, and I went back 
to my successful rival, who looked nervously at the electric push. He has not 
been hurt at all. Finally he laid down his pipe and sprang to his feet. 

Three times a day for many months I had witnessed this performance, but custom 
had not reconciled my mind to it. There is one of the very utmost importance, 
however. Here are two moorland farmhouses, High Tor and Foulmire. If you will 
be pleased to sit upon that stump, we will now continue our exercise. According 
to my notion he dropped it while stooping over Drebber's body, and did not miss 
it at the time. After leaving the house he discovered his loss and hurried 
back, but found the police already in possession, owing to his own folly in 
leaving the candle burning. Now, then the left hand on the apple of my throat. 
Dead stop. That can't be all, Watson? ATTENTA gives no sense. In silence we 
stood together in the darkness and watched the hurrying figures who passed and 
repassed in front of us. Even the rafters above our heads were lined by solemn 
fowls, who lazily shifted their weight from one leg to the other as our voices 
disturbed their slumbers. They had slate-colored skin, which was scaled like a 
lizard's and shimmered where the sun shone upon it. At dusk we saw Dr. She took 
no liquid, as there was a water-tap in the stables, and it was the rule that 
the lad on duty should drink nothing else. I tell you, gentlemen, it nearly 
drove me mad. He would probably consider that to send back the launch or to 
keep it at a wharf would make pursuit easy if the police did happen to get on 
his track. You will soften him, Watson. What is the use of troubling Mr. But I 
beg and pray you, gentlemen, that you will go from my house, for I know not 
what may come of it if his rage should gain the mastery of him. " 

"Altamont has a nice taste in wines, and he took a fancy to my Tokay. 

"What did you do?" he asked. 

"This case grows upon me, Watson," said he. Holmes drew a note from his pocket, 
and read aloud: 

Abbey Grange, Marsham, Kent, 3:30 A. As the gleam of the street-lamps flashed 
upon his austere features, I saw that his brows were drawn down in thought and 
his thin lips compressed. Have you read up the case?" 

"We have just done so. You will find a small brougham waiting close to the 
curb, driven by a fellow with a heavy black cloak tipped at the collar with 
red. " 

"I'm the first to admit that," said the detective heartily. 

"I really hardly know what I am doing," he cried. It was a lovely trip, the 
dainty green of the spring below, the virgin white of the winter above; but it 
was clear to me that never for one instant did Holmes forget the shadow which 
lay across him. But I had no time to think of the danger, for another stone 
sang past me as I hung by my hands from the edge of the ledge. " 

"There is sooth in what you say, Master Micheldene," said Sir Nigel, "and I 
trust that we may come upon this Roger Clubfoot, for I have heard that he is a 
very stout and skilful soldier, and a man from whom much honor is to be gained. 
He had long, quivering fingers as agile and restless as the antennae of an 
insect. What did he do? He sprang up on the mantelpiece, could not quite reach 
it, put his knee on the bracket--you will see the impression in the dust--and 
so got his knife to bear upon the cord. He had suffered for years from an 
enlarged spleen, but he now became rapidly worse, and towards the end of April 
we were informed that he was beyond all hope, and that he wished to make a last 
communication to us. 

"I am Jefferson Hope," he said. Holmes, and that has something to do with my 
visit to you to-day. I shall be true to Hosmer. There lies our one and only 
hope. All was exactly as I left it, save only that the papers which had been 
committed to my care had been taken from the desk on which they lay. But this 
rose is an extra. Already they say too much Curupuri live on this place, and 
they go home. Softly we stole along until we had come into the other wing. We 
were just in time to catch a glimpse of the tall, black-bearded figure, his 
shoulders rounded as he tiptoed down the passage. " 

Leaving the thumbless archer and his brood, the wayfarers struck through the 
scattered huts of Emery Down, and out on to the broad rolling heath covered 
deep in ferns and in heather, where droves of the half-wild black forest pigs 
were rooting about amongst the hillocks. " 

"That is what you may expect to see when I follow you. We could get no 
information from her, however, as she is very old and feeble. 

To-morrow (or to-day, rather, for it is already dawn as I write) we shall make 
our first venture into this strange land. "He only comes there to see me, 
apparently, for the place is deserted up to the very hour he names. " 

"And has your business been attended to in your absence?" 

"Nothing to complain of, sir. From their pious oasis they looked dreamily out 
at the desert of life, a place full of stormings and strivings--comfortless, 
restless, and overshadowed by evil. But above, perched each upon its own stone, 
tall, gray, and withered, more like dead and dried specimens than actual living 
creatures, sat the horrible males, absolutely motionless save for the rolling 
of their red eyes or an occasional snap of their rat-trap beaks as a dragon-fly 
went past them. You know that yourself. " 

They landed me at Vauxhall, with my heavy iron box, and with a bluff, genial 
inspector as my companion. 

"My fiddle would be the better for new strings," he remarked. This, in truth, 
his neighbours might have pardoned, 

seeing that saints have never flourished in those parts, 

but there was in him a certain wanton and cruel humour 

which made his name a by-word through the West. It 

chanced that this Hugo came to love (if, indeed, so dark 

a passion may be known under so bright a name) the daughter 

of a yeoman who held lands near the Baskerville estate. For the rest, it was 
cracked, exceedingly dusty, and spotted in several places, although there 
seemed to have been some attempt to hide the discoloured patches by smearing 
them with ink. Even in that dim light there could be no mistaking those 
features. First of all, I wish to know whether there is any inn in this 
neighbourhood known as 'Elrige's'?" 

The servants were cross-questioned, but none of them had heard of such a place. 
Clap in the clout, by God! though a hand's-breadth lower than I had meant. Now 
for the rogue with the head upon his pike. There was such a ring of conviction 
in his voice that I glanced up in surprise. He shook them out on the table, and 
at once I saw by his eager face that his hopes had been raised. I chanced into 
the telegraph bureau, and he was leaving it. The lamp beat upon his face, and 
so intent was it and so still that it might have been that of a clear-cut 
classical statue, a personification of alertness and expectation. " 

"And how?" I asked involuntarily. You have lost one of your boots, you say?" 

"Well, mislaid it, anyhow. " 

The young hunter's dark face grew so gloomy over this remark that Lucy Ferrier 
laughed aloud. "You would have made an actor, and a rare one. " 

"That is the exact situation. " 

"Very good, sir. 

It had hardly died away when an amazing thing happened. He was bemoaning 
himself this morning because he could not get someone to go halves with him in 
some nice rooms which he had found, and which were too much for his purse. The 
exploits of the Red Chief, as they called him, had become legends among them, 
but the real facts, as far as I could learn them, were amazing enough. 

"That's it!" cried Hatherley, in intense excitement. " 

"Pshaw! fear not," the other answered in the same low tone. "You have done what 
you could to save him, Harcomb," said he. " 

"But you have read the evidence. Mortimer, "it is only mislaid. Stapleton's 
first idea was that this young stranger from Canada might possibly be done to 
death in London without coming down to Devonshire at all. He distrusted his 
wife ever since she had refused to help him in laying a trap for the old man, 
and he dared not leave her long out of his sight for fear he should lose his 
influence over her. He was well liked by the few neighbours who called upon 
him, and he has the reputation down there of being a very learned man. If you 
will have the kindness to hold the lamp for me, we shall now extend our 
researches to the room above,--the secret room in which the treasure was found. 
" 

"For myself," said Sir Nigel, "I have heard such words fall from the lips of 
this lady that I am of the opinion that there is no woman, save only one, who 
can be in any way compared to her in beauty and in goodness. It's hardly fair 
of you, Mr. " 

"Well, I don't know it; but Vermissa is out of my beat. With both arms clasping 
the branch, I scrambled  hard with my feet until I had worked, first my body, 
and then my knees, onto it. 

From the side of the plateau on which we were, slopes of woodland, with 
occasional glades, stretched down for five or six miles to the central lake. " 

He had now flung open the windows and we were gazing out upon the silent and 
motionless landscape. "You won't stand it, eh?" 

"Don't be such a fool, Professor!" I cried. Look, for example, at the queer lot 
of things which he took from Acton's--what was it?--a ball of string, a 
letter-weight, and I don't know what other odds and ends. " 

"Well, we are quite in your hands, Mr. Therein lies our salvation. There are 
one or two minor points which were brought out in the inquest, and which are 
worth considering. 

"The danger may bide," said he, shrugging his broad shoulders. "You can tell 
your employer, Lord Mount-James, that I do not wish to have anything to do 
either with him or with his agents. " 

Summerlee groaned. " 

"I understand you to say that your room is on the second floor, that there is 
no entrance from without, and that from within no one could go up unobserved. 
The local police had to be called in, they had to communicate with Scotland 
Yard, Hopkins had to go out, and he in turn had to send for me. "  Out went the 
beard and down came the eyelids. That is the cause of all the mischief, the 
wicked Hugo, who started the Hound of the Baskervilles. He had foresight, but 
has less now than formerly, pointing to a moral retrogression, which, when 
taken with the decline of his fortunes, seems to indicate some evil influence, 
probably drink, at work upon him. But a girl always knows. If I could be 
spared----" 

"Well, I don't see that you can. On the other hand, if we had fired through the 
hedge and wounded him he would soon have been on the top of us--to say nothin' 
of giving ourselves away. The two boats were paddling within a few yards of 
each other when first we heard it, and our Indians remained motionless, as if 
they had been turned to bronze, listening intently with expressions of terror 
upon their faces. 

She had reached the outskirts of the city when she found the road blocked by a 
great drove of cattle, driven by a half-dozen wild-looking herdsmen from the 
plains. "He was an uncommon drunk sort o' man," he said. The first time we had 
five thousand crowns out of him, though he made much ado about it. Let us slip 
out and see what we can see. "Don't drop the instruments, I beg. It hain't got 
no fangs, so I gives it the run o' the room, for it keeps the beetles down. " 

Sherlock Holmes waved our strange visitor into a chair. "Really, Gregson, you 
are getting along. We shall make something of you yet. 

There was a telegraph-office at a short distance from the hotel. "Wine for the 
lady, squire! The blessed hour of sight hath passed. " 









It was late ere Alleyne Edricson, having carried Sir Nigel the goblet of spiced 
wine which it was his custom to drink after the curling of his hair, was able 
at last to seek his chamber. "If I miss one stoop I will strike him on the 
next. The air of London is the sweeter for my presence. He rejoiced that they 
should all be there to take counsel over his news. " 

"Well, we can soon determine that. 

"We have been allies too long to quarrel now at the very hour of victory," he 
said. Holmes, the crime was only committed at three this morning. " 

Holmes for a second time held out his hand to the sailor. " 

"I quoted the postscript. I would station a score of archers here in the pass, 
with all our pennons jutting forth from the rocks, and as many nakirs and drums 
and bugles as we have with us, so that those who follow us in the fading light 
may think that the whole army of the prince is upon them, and fear to go 
further. " 

"But his meals?" 

"It was his particular direction that we should always, when he rang, leave his 
meal upon a chair, outside his door. 

"I can well believe it," returned Sir Nigel; "I have met no man who is quicker 
to follow where honor leads. He had been out with his serving-man in the 
morning at Ross, and he had told the man that he must hurry, as he had an 
appointment of importance to keep at three. Joseph Stangerson. Holmes was sunk 
in profound thought, and hardly opened his mouth until we had passed Clapham 
Junction. The headlines are: 'Mysterious Affair at Lower Norwood. I am 
conscious myself of a weight at my heart and a feeling of impending 
danger--ever present danger, which is the more terrible because I am unable to 
define it. 



"DEAR PROFESSOR CHALLENGER," it said, "As a humble student of Nature, I have 
always taken the most profound interest in your speculations as to the 
differences between Darwin and Weissmann. 

"Now then, Mr. 

"You appear to me," he said, at last, "to be taking matters too much for 
granted. "It's a woman's wedding-ring. I'll have a row of electric lamps up 
here inside of six months, and you won't know it again, with a thousand 
candle-power Swan and Edison right here in front of the hall door. " 

"You can forget it or remember it, just as you like. "Was he in favour of such 
a union?" 

"No, he was averse to it also. " 

"A spy?" 

"Well, it was evident from what we have heard that Baskerville has been very 
closely shadowed by someone since he has been in town. " 

"Young clerk," said the bailiff, "you speak of that of which you know nothing. 
Here, in a broad thoroughfare, once the abode of wealthy City merchants, we 
found the sculpture works for which we searched. " 

The three archers named stood at the further end of the poop, balancing 
themselves with feet widely spread and bows drawn, until the heads of the 
cloth-yard arrows were level with the centre of the stave. " 

"And yet she had a certificate of death. 

"I got a message from the head office that a gent at this address had been 
inquiring for No. ' 

"'Done!' said he. The passage outside was empty. Creatures survive which would 
otherwise disappear. You will observe that both the pterodactyl and the 
stegosaurus are Jurassic, and therefore of a great age in the order of life. Do 
you remember a box--an ivory box?  It came on Wednesday. " 

"Then my servant will call a cab, and I shall be with you in an instant. 

"But these glasses do puzzle me, I confess. "I suppose one can tone down to it, 
but I feel a bit out of the picture at present. But no doubt it is appreciable 
even in our young friend here. Above all, shun the snares of women, for they 
are ever set for the foolish feet of the young. Hosmer Angel vanish from your 
memory, as he has done from your life. Then the fact that the two men were 
never together, but that the one always appeared when the other was away, was 
suggestive. If he wants anything else he prints it on a slip of paper and 
leaves it. " 

"I assure you that I am simply here upon a visit to my friend, Sir Henry, and 
that I need no help of any kind. " 

"And so belabored as to be scarce able to crawl along it," cried a third. "Then 
let us put up an orison. At present it is not too much to say that it is of 
such weight it may have an influence upon European history. 

"Now, Mr. Family papers, letters from my poor wife, diplomas of universities 
which have done me honour. Here is the key. We entered together, and he closed 
it behind us. 

Two hours later, we, our packages, and all we owned, were at the foot of the 
cliff. 

"You have two sisters, I believe. But what had been in the box? What had she 
done with that? Of course, it must have been the old metal and pebbles which my 
client had dragged from the mere. Such arrows were of little avail to the 
hunter who attacked the beast, because their action in that torpid circulation 
was slow, and before its powers failed it could certainly overtake and slay its 
assailant. Huxtable's hearthrug. It was already dark when we reached it. That's 
absolutely all we have at present, Mr. It all comes down to this: That there 
are some men that have good cause to hate me and would give their last dollar 
to know that they had got me. At our hail the man in the stern sprang up from 
the deck and shook his two clinched fists at us, cursing the while in a high, 
cracked voice. And thence came the John Douglas who for a second time married a 
worthy mate, and lived for five years as a Sussex county gentleman, a life 
which ended with the strange happenings of which we have heard. You pull down, 
you despoil; but they build up, they restore. Just let me alone, and I'll soon 
be right. " 

I was surprised to find my companion speaking as though he were about to set 
out on a journey, since he had not said anything to me about it. " 

"Yet what assurance have we," said the prince, "that this is not some varlet 
masquerading in his master's harness, or some caitiff knight, the very touch of 
whose lance might bring infamy upon an honorable gentleman?" 

"It is not so, sire," cried the squire earnestly. " 

"But she will refuse. His head was sunk upon his breast, and he looked from my 
point of view like a strange, lank bird, with dull gray plumage and a black 
top-knot. 

He gave me the amused hand-shake and encouraging smile which the head master 
bestows upon the small boy, and, having greeted the others and helped to 
collect their bags and their cylinders of oxygen, he stowed us and them away in 
a large motor-car which was driven by the same impassive Austin, the man of few 
words, whom I had seen in the character of butler upon the occasion of my first 
eventful visit to the Professor. I was at my wit's end where to get the money, 
but a sudden idea came to me. A mistake would have been fatal. By no possible 
supposition could this stranger, Fitzroy Simpson, have caused curry to be 
served in the trainer's family that night, and it is surely too monstrous a 
coincidence to suppose that he happened to come along with powdered opium upon 
the very night when a dish happened to be served which would disguise the 
flavor. We went forth in little ships and came back in great galleys--for of 
fifty tall ships of Spain, over two score flew the Cross of St. Holmes groaned, 
and his face glimmered white through the darkness. " 

"You certainly have the air of something unusual having occurred," said Holmes. 
Scanlan, his original acquaintance aboard the train, had occasion shortly 
afterwards to move into Vermissa, and the two lodged together. McMurdo told him 
shortly what was intended. No doubt it must have struck him that the apartment 
was very exposed for so secret a meeting. " 

"I have had so much to do inside the house," the detective said evasively. 
"Come, Watson! And you, Lestrade, could you favour us with your company for an 
hour or two?  We will begin our investigation by a visit to Aldgate Station. " 

"There's one thing," said I, as we walked down to the station. Bernstone, and 
from the Indian servant, who, Mr. Thaddeus tell me, sleeps in the next garret. 
By a singular piece of good fortune, Mr. James Windibank running at the top of 
his speed down the road. " 

"Thank you. Then the front ranks began to surge slowly forward, to trot, to 
canter, to gallop, and in an instant the whole vast array was hurtling onward, 
line after line, the air full of the thunder of their cries, the ground shaking 
with the beat of their hoofs, the valley choked with the rushing torrent of 
steel, topped by the waving plumes, the slanting spears and the fluttering 
banderoles. " 

"How about moving that drugget?" 

"Well, sir, it was a bit rumpled, certainly, when I came back. 

"You first, Small," remarked the wary Jones as they left the room. As I gave a 
last hurried glance around, I saw a thin line of yellow light between two of 
the boards, which broadened and broadened as a small panel was pushed backward. 
As to the stone, it glanced off obliquely and fell midway between the vessels. 
" 

"Well done!" said Holmes in an encouraging voice. " 

"Indeed. 

"You have solved it!" I cried. S. A. " 

"Wonderful!" I ejaculated. "And now, Mr. We cannot spare time even to discuss 
what you have told me. Let us proceed. Very good. He comes at ten. So in 
silence they walked under the spread of the branches on the grass-grown path 
from Boldre. That all fits into your hypothesis, Watson. He threw back his 
head, and there he stood in the golden glow with all his old Assyrian 
luxuriance of beard, all his native insolence of drooping eyelids and 
intolerant eyes. What would he do?" 

"Come again next night with a more useful tool. 

"You have introduced yourselves, I can see. " 

"Nay, nay, Sir John, you have gained as much honor as one man can bear, and it 
were hard if you could not rest now. " 

"One moment, Dr. " He pulled off his velvet cap of maintenance as he spoke, and 
displayed a pate which was as bald as an egg, and shone bravely in the 
firelight. When those packets were sealed up, Jonas Oldacre got McFarlane to 
secure one of the seals by putting his thumb upon the soft wax. Meanwhile, I 
can see that the Indians are still in their place, and I am sure that the 
faithful Zambo will be here presently to get my letter. Will you associate me 
in your investigation, or will you prefer that I should act independently?" 

"I should be proud to feel that we were acting together, Mr. " 

"There is no alternative, I assure you. He is a harmless enough fellow, Parker 
by name, a garroter by trade, and a remarkable performer upon the jew's-harp. 

"'You will excuse my coming in, doctor,' said he to me, speaking English with a 
slight lisp. I heard that you had been down to the office. " 

"And how have you succeeded?" 

"Well. All the afternoon he sat in the stalls wrapped in the most perfect 
happiness, gently waving his long, thin fingers in time to the music, while his 
gently smiling face and his languid, dreamy eyes were as unlike those of Holmes 
the sleuth-hound, Holmes the relentless, keen-witted, ready-handed criminal 
agent, as it was possible to conceive. Well, here we are at Chiselhurst 
Station, and we shall soon set our doubts at rest. There is only one provision 
which I must make. A cab from the station, one of those prehistoric survivals 
which are only to be found in our country villages, was toiling slowly up the 
hill. There was no mistaking the angular form of Professor Summerlee. I 
therefore sent off a telegram to my friend Algar, of the Liverpool force, and 
asked him to find out if Mrs. He advised me to come to you. He fled when he 
knew the game was up, still clutching it. But the other end is not frayed. 
Meanwhile you will leave me these papers, and I think that it is very likely 
that I shall be able to pay you a visit shortly and to throw some light upon 
your case. 

"A lady yesterday entered your study. 'We have sworn it. Now you will find the 
carriage waiting, and my friend will see you on your way. Then I have to bustle 
about and see things with my own eyes. " 

"A day which has saved England from a great public scandal," said the banker, 
rising. She must be a heartless creature to sit laughing at some jest within a 
few hours of her husband's murder. The door was open; inside, huddled together 
upon a chair, Hunter was sunk in a state of absolute stupor, the favorite's 
stall was empty, and there were no signs of his trainer. The stick had been 
removed, but there also the marks were slight. Occasional brooks with pebbly 
bottoms and fern-draped banks gurgled down the shallow gorges in the hill, and 
offered good camping-grounds every evening on the banks of some rock-studded 
pool, where swarms of little blue-backed fish, about the size and shape of 
English trout, gave us a delicious supper. 

On the ninth day after leaving the canoes, having done, as I reckon, about a 
hundred and twenty miles, we began to emerge from the trees, which had grown 
smaller until they were mere shrubs. 

"Exactly. 

"Visitin' my friends, the pterodactyls," said  he. I shall want you to help me 
to my freedom, and to help my three companions to theirs. Tonga had brought all 
his earthly possessions with him, his arms and his gods. Very much surprised 
was he when I made at him with the rope's end and cursed him for a little 
blood-thirsty imp. Besides, what use was my hair to me? Many people are 
improved by wearing it short and perhaps I should be among the number. " 

"Who did know of the existence of that letter?" 

"No one in the house. " 

Barker looked sternly at the detective. It gave even my hardened nerves a 
shudder to look at it. 

A rainy night had been followed by a glorious morning, and the heath-covered 
countryside, with the glowing clumps of flowering gorse, seemed all the more 
beautiful to eyes which were weary of the duns and drabs and slate grays of 
London. ' 

"'You cannot say what it was?' 

"'No, I had a feeling something was there. Melas, I hope, but we could not get 
on without you. The girl is not told of the arrival of her brother, and finds 
it out by the merest accident. These two people are presumably dead, or we 
should have heard their story before now. But soon, by the merciful provision 
of nature, the over-excited nerve ceased to respond. 





























THE WHITE COMPANY 

By Sir Arthur Conan Doyle 





CONTENTS. The first page was disappointing, however, as it contained nothing 
but the picture of a very fat man in a pea-jacket, with the legend, "Jimmy 
Colver on the Mail-boat," written beneath it. Watson has already heard of it. " 

"Glad to meet you, sir. "What do you think about it, Mr. "Am I to be preached 
to by a child?" he cried, staring across at Alleyne with an inflamed and angry 
countenance. Hudson has made some change in that figure eight times, or once in 
every quarter of an hour. Pray draw up to it, and I shall order you a cup of 
hot coffee, for I observe that you are shivering. " 

"Of warning, Mr. "Our minds will play us strange pranks, and bethink you that 
these words of the Lady Tiphaine Du Guesclin have wrought upon us and shaken 
us. " 

"I have not observed the quarter-mile posts," said I. " 

"Then anyone could have got over it?" 

"Yes. "I have seen him with these two eyes in a stricken field, and never did 
man carry himself better. " He flung himself upon the  cold meat and bread 
which were still lying upon the table from his host's supper, and devoured it 
voraciously. 

"No fault, my fair lord, but a virtue: for how many rich ransoms have you won, 
and yet have scattered the crowns among page and archer and varlet, until in a 
week you had not as much as would buy food and forage. "Certes, I should have 
been in the river now but for you, for I was born in Warwickshire, which is but 
a dry county, and there are few who swim in those parts. " 

"I ask no thanks," Alleyne answered shortly. "We shall see that all is well 
with you. She used to be at the Allegro. Barker, very pale and excited, come 
out of the study. He intercepted Mrs. Porter had sent a boy down with an urgent 
message. She is evidently harmless. So moved was the young clerk by these mute 
appeals, that he came forth from the trees and crossed the meadow, uncertain 
what to do, and yet loth to hold back from one who might need his aid. He came 
to me, look you, saying that if I would furnish him with a gallon of ale, 
wherewith to strengthen himself as he worked, and also the pigments and a 
board, he would paint for me a noble pied merlin which I might hang along with 
the blazonry over my door. 

"'I am afraid that it is quite essential,' said he. 

"I have a hunting-crop. Now, since we do the taking of him, why should we not 
do the rest as well? The jewels will be as well with us as in the Company's 
coffers. It is equally certain that this house cannot be more than a mile or 
two from Oxshott, since Garcia was walking in that direction and hoped, 
according to my reading of the facts, to be back in Wisteria Lodge in time to 
avail himself of an alibi, which would only be valid up to one o'clock. Now we 
might suppose that this murdered man--this Douglas whose approaching fate was 
known by one of the arch-criminal's subordinates--had in some way betrayed the 
chief. They are on the further side of the moat. There are one maid, an old 
manservant, the sister, and the brother, the latter not a very strong man. " 

MacDonald shook his head. 

"The reason was simple enough," said the dogged Summerlee. "Do you keep your 
spoon in your own broth. Leon Sterndale, and not upon mine. As a proof I will 
tell you some of the facts upon which my conclusions are based. 

When he passed Penerley, where were three cottages and a barn, he reached the 
edge of the tree country, and found the great barren heath of Blackdown 
stretching in front of him, all pink with heather and bronzed with the fading 
ferns. The keen air of the mountains and the balsamic odour of the pine trees 
took the place of nurse and mother to the young girl. For five minutes he was 
so close to my rock that by stretching out my hand I could have touched the 
hideous waving hackles upon his back. Then he burst into a hearty laugh. 

"We both thought the best resource was flight, when pursued by so formidable an 
antagonist; so you will find the nest empty when you call to-morrow. "You only 
tried once, and you remember how you crashed through the gate of the garage. 
Look at those shields upon my wall and under my eaves. There is the whole song 
of it. A second very obvious one is that this young man really is the heir of a 
great property, however modest his means may at present be, and it is not 
impossible that a plot to hold him for ransom might be concocted. Who he was or 
what he wanted is more than I can tell. 

We had turned away from the edge, and had penetrated about fifty yards of close 
brushwood, when there came a frightful rending crash from behind us. "It is now 
necessary that we should try to throw some light upon this third bullet, which 
has clearly, from the splintering of the wood, been fired from inside the room. 
Your advice will be altogether invaluable to me. When he breathed his vows to 
her, as he had done to a hundred before her, she flattered herself that she 
alone had touched his heart. Here we may take it that there is a love matter, 
but that the maiden is not so much angry as perplexed, or grieved. 

"It's a business that needs delicate treatment," said Holmes. But there I was 
firm. There is one, Francois Villet, at Cahors, who will send me wine-casks for 
my cloth-bales, so to Cahors I will go, though all the robber-knights of 
Christendom were to line the roads like yonder poplars. 

"When Lord Saltire's disappearance was discovered, I at once called a roll of 
the whole establishment--boys, masters, and servants. 

As I listened to the words and realized what they meant, a great shadow seemed 
to pass from my soul. A haze lay low upon the farthest sky-line, out of which 
jutted the fantastic shapes of Belliver and Vixen Tor. Gregson of Scotland 
Yard. Within all was absolute silence and darkness. I am interested; but, as 
you observe, I am not surprised. Our business was soon done. Yesterday a lady, 
who has been known as Mme. At ten o'clock I went round and saw that all the 
fellows had gone to roost, for I believe in strict training and plenty of sleep 
to keep a team fit. Sherlock Holmes was never at fault, however, and he 
muttered the names as the cab rattled through squares and in and out by 
tortuous by-streets. " 

"Ah! that would be Toby. "The name is familiar to me," said he. Give her time, 
dame, give her time. Look at Clive--just a clerk, and he conquered India!  By 
George!  I'll do something in the world yet!" 

She laughed at my sudden Irish effervescence. What sober man's key could have 
scored those grooves?  But you will never see a drunkard's watch without them. 

"Good! What are you going to take, Mr. As he stepped into the circle of yellow 
light thrown by the lantern she saw that he was a person of gentlemanly 
bearing, dressed in a gray suit of tweeds, with a cloth cap. I flung the 
curtain aside and found myself face to face with a broad-shouldered elderly 
man, who had just stepped into the room. The cries, which had sunk down into a 
hoarse, inarticulate shouting, came from the room which we had first visited. 
Finally, it was not until after midnight that the four travelers were released 
at the entrance to Lord John Roxton's chambers in the Albany, and that the 
exuberant crowd, having sung 'They are Jolly Good Fellows' in chorus, concluded 
their program with 'God Save the King. 

All this I shall some day write at fuller length, and amidst these more 
stirring days I would tenderly sketch in these lovely summer evenings, when 
with the deep blue sky above us we lay in good comradeship among the long 
grasses by the wood and marveled at the strange fowl that swept over us and the 
quaint new creatures which crept from their burrows to watch us, while above us 
the boughs of the bushes were heavy with luscious fruit, and below us strange 
and lovely flowers peeped at us from among the herbage; or those long moonlit 
nights when we lay out upon the shimmering surface of the great lake and 
watched with wonder and awe the huge circles rippling out from the sudden 
splash of some fantastic monster; or the greenish gleam, far down in the deep 
water, of some strange creature upon the confines of darkness. A levelled 
revolver met him there with the stern blue eyes of Captain Marvin of the Mine 
Police gleaming behind the sights. Holmes entered on tiptoe, waited for me to 
follow, and then very gently closed the door. If Elsie wished to tell me she 
would. According to my notion he dropped it while stooping over Drebber's body, 
and did not miss it at the time. 

"The absence of the latter means nothing, though its presence may mean 
everything," said Holmes. He will probably be here in a few minutes. To the 
last gasp he would always be the master. 

No men have ever found themselves in a worse position; nor is there any use in 
disclosing to you our exact geographical situation and asking our friends for a 
relief party. "Had they always a fire in this small room on a spring evening?" 

Mortimer Tregennis explained that the night was cold and damp. For that reason, 
after his arrival, the fire was lit. Then the gas would run low, we too should 
lie gasping upon that cherry-coloured boudoir carpet, and the fate of the human 
race and of all earthly life would be complete. The sun was just grazing the 
top of the oak. His blood was fairly aflame, however, and he needed no such 
challenge. Bernstone, an Indian butler named Lal Rao, and a porter, or 
gatekeeper, named McMurdo. It is quite certain that the thief or thieves were 
well acquainted with the house, for Mr. This then must for every reason be our 
road. There was talk of faking. He examined them carefully with his lens, and 
then some dim and vague marks upon the earth beneath. So much the woman was 
able to tell me, and also that it was a wonder the man lived, seeing how 
twisted he was, and that he spoke in a strange tongue sometimes, and that for 
the last two nights she had heard him groaning and weeping in his bedroom. 

"But for two of them, and one a woman, it must have been heavy work the raising 
of that stone. 577 axite express," said he. "I got that big fellow with it. 

"But he is right. Now the great salt plain stretched before his eyes, and the 
distant belt of savage mountains, without a sign anywhere of plant or tree, 
which might indicate the presence of moisture. The door at the bottom was 
closed, but unlocked. Some people would have waited until their advertisements 
were answered, or until parties came forward and volunteered information. But 
there are curious and suggestive details about the case, Watson. And all 
because she will not find a beggarly sum which she could get by turning her 
diamonds into paste. What can I do? I am of no more use or value than that 
broken bowstave. The Rucastles will be gone by that time, and Toller will, we 
hope, be incapable. Through it, as you know, I came into possession of the 
pills, the existence of which I had already surmised. She had a commission from 
her father in the City, and was dashing in as she had done many a time before, 
with all the fearlessness of youth, thinking only of her task and how it was to 
be performed. She never told me of those marks on her arm that you saw this 
morning, but I know very well that they come from a stab with a hatpin. She 
would never bring any stain upon it--of that I am sure. But love is an 
emotional thing, and whatever is emotional is opposed to that true cold reason 
which I place above all things. 

"Good heavens!" I cried in amazement. 

"Yes, I have put it away where you shall never lay hand upon it," he cried, 
exultantly. ' 

"'After you went to bed?' 

"'Yes. From all parts of the hall squires and pages came running, until a 
dense, swaying crowd surrounded the disputants. " 

"But how could you guess what the motive was?" 

"Had there been women in the house, I should have suspected a mere vulgar 
intrigue. Only one, but a very formidable person. Evans Pott was his name, and 
even the great Boss of Vermissa felt towards him something of the repulsion and 
fear which the huge Danton may have felt for the puny but dangerous 
Robespierre. 

One day Scanlan, who was McMurdo's fellow boarder, received a note from McGinty 
inclosing one from Evans Pott, which informed him that he was sending over two 
good men, Lawler and Andrews, who had instructions to act in the neighbourhood; 
though it was best for the cause that no particulars as to their objects should 
be given. It was two in the morning before they came to the lonely house. " 

"And whose fault that, my sweet bird?" said he. Even if she couldn't love me, 
it was a great deal to me just to see her dainty form about the house, and to 
hear the sound of her voice. Our pistols rang out together. " 

"Which were very well justified," observed Holmes. "I think, your Grace, that 
this can only be done by absolute frankness between us. Is there any small 
matter in which I may oblige you?" 

"Since you ask me," said the man-at-arms, "I would take it kindly if you could 
spare a link or two of the chain which hangs round your neck. The organization 
is patent and public. 

"Have you managed it?" asked Holmes. Touching your question, we may tell you 
that we are strollers and jugglers, who, having performed with much applause at 
Winchester fair, are now on our way to the great Michaelmas market at Ringwood. 
A good padre in France read to us from a scroll the whole truth of the matter. 
It was strange to see this single candle burning there in the middle of the 
moor, with no sign of life near it--just the one straight yellow flame and the 
gleam of the rock on each side of it. Three shining mackintoshed figures are 
walking down the quay, making for the gang-plank of the great liner from which 
the blue-peter is flying. On the left was a large, deep fireplace, with a 
massive, overhanging oak mantelpiece. A little diplomacy was needed, but when 
Holmes understood that the establishment was a bachelor one, and that he would 
be allowed the fullest freedom, he fell in with my plans and a week after our 
return from Lyons we were under the Colonel's roof. More than once, as tufts of 
grass came out in my hand or my foot slipped in the wet notches of the rock, I 
thought that I was gone. So gaunt were these poor folk, so worn and spent--with 
bent and knotted frames, and sullen, hopeless, mutinous faces--that it made the 
young Englishman heart-sick to look upon them. Quick as a panther, Alleyne 
sprang in with a thrust, but Tranter, who was as active as he was strong, had 
already recovered himself and turned it aside with a movement of his heavy 
blade. Again he whizzed in a blow which made the spectators hold their breath, 
and again Alleyne very quickly and swiftly slipped from under it, and sent back 
two lightning thrusts which the other could scarce parry. So close were they to 
each other that Alleyne had no time to spring back from the next cut, which 
beat down his sword and grazed his forehead, sending the blood streaming into 
his eyes and down his cheeks. Barker. " 

"That's all clear enough. " 

He chuckled as he poured out the coffee. " 

Mr. Having, however, at last, satisfied himself as to his identity, the man's 
surprise changed to consternation. 

"You are mad to come here," he cried. "I doubt if we shall catch her. " 

"Suppose we go down-stream a short way and lie in wait for them," said Jones, 
eagerly. Armstrong took a quick step forward and wrung Holmes by the hand. 

"So, gentlemen," said he, "you have attained your end and have certainly chosen 
a particularly delicate moment for your intrusion. To the logician all things 
should be seen exactly as they are, and to underestimate one's self is as much 
a departure from truth as to exaggerate one's own powers. None did come for a 
week, and then yesterday morning I found this paper lying on the sundial in the 
garden. On our knocking, however, the door was instantly thrown open by a 
Hindoo servant clad in a yellow turban, white loose-fitting clothes, and a 
yellow sash. I was instantly aroused, and, with the two footmen, started off at 
once in search of the missing girl. " 

"Really! You surprise me. 

"Dear me, this is very disappointing! I fear, Watson, that all our expectations 
come to nothing. 

The maid looked aslant at him with laughing eyes. He rode no more to the wars, 
but he found his way to every jousting within thirty miles; and the Hampshire 
youth treasured it as the highest honor when a word of praise fell from him as 
to their management of their horses, or their breaking of their lances. 

"Why, Mr. There was another hand to be played, and yet another and another. 

"Trevor senior was a widower, and my friend his only son. "We have had a 
charming little breath of your beautiful Dartmoor air. I don't think we can 
even venture to smoke to pass the time. " 

"But if he is innocent, who has done it?" 

"Ah! who? I would call your attention very particularly to two points. Aylward, 
who had drawn an arrow from his quiver, carefully greased the head of it, and 
sped it at the same mark. Sir Oliver and you, my Lord Angus, I give you the 
right wing, and the left to you, Sir Simon, and to you, Sir Richard Causton. It 
sent the blood cold through Alleyne's veins to see that as they came 
together--the man and the beast--the creature reared up, with eyes ablaze with 
fear and hate, and whirled its great paws above the knight to smite him to the 
earth. My companion let down the window, and I caught a glimpse of a low, 
arched doorway with a lamp burning above it. No reply. 

For a fairyland it was--the most wonderful that the imagination of man could 
conceive. Among other things I exhibited this powder, and I told him of its 
strange properties, how it stimulates those brain centres which control the 
emotion of fear, and how either madness or death is the fate of the unhappy 
native who is subjected to the ordeal by the priest of his tribe. In the 
latter, as may be remembered, Sherlock Holmes was able, by winding up the dead 
man's watch, to prove that it had been wound up two hours before, and that 
therefore the deceased had gone to bed within that time--a deduction which was 
of the greatest importance in clearing up the case. 

"'By Jove!' cried my client. You can tell me any message you have for him. "I 
have had nothing else to do. " 

The detective mounted the stairs, and our lamp gleamed upon his shining 
waterproof. 

"There is one thing occurs to me," said he at last. It is generally agreed 
that, apart from the difference of clocks, there may have been local causes 
which influenced the action of the poison. " 

"She will not sell. "Surely my deductions are simplicity itself," said he. 

"That ends it," said he. On the next page is a diagram of the mechanism of its 
wing. If he braved the matter out, death would unfailingly come upon him, and 
usually in some strange and unforeseen manner. Even across the street I could 
see a great blue anchor tattooed on the back of the fellow's hand. As to 
Challenger, he was wonderful!  Never have I so realized the elemental greatness 
of the man, the sweep and power of his understanding. Looking back we saw only 
the dense screen of trees, but that long-drawn yell told us how many of our 
enemies lurked among them. There was something hypnotic in those terrible eyes. 
' 

"'Pooh!' said he, gripping hard at his courage. The other is: 'Inspector 
Stanley Hopkins, 46 Lord Street, Brixton. I tried to scream and was vaguely 
aware of some hoarse croak which was my own voice, but distant and detached 
from myself. Now I'll be getting home. " 

As he spoke, the vast throng of Spaniards and of Frenchmen trooped across the 
plain, with brandished arms and tossing banners. Apparently the tenants had 
brought little or nothing with them, and all the furniture down to the smallest 
details had been taken over with the house. The behavior of the audience at 
present was good-humored, but mischievous. The curved and shadowed drive led us 
to a low, dark house, pitch-black against a slate-coloured sky. " 

"By Saint Paul!" said Sir Nigel, "I do not think that there can be any such 
doings at Christchurch, and I am very easy of the fortalice so long as my sweet 
wife hangs the key of the outer bailey at the head of her bed. 

And that was how a great scandal threatened to affect the kingdom of Bohemia, 
and how the best plans of Mr. " 

"I'd start this next minute if I knew where we could find him," said McMurdo. 
Do you think that the Duchess had anything to do with the matter?" 

The great minister showed perceptible hesitation. It was half-past twelve. But 
I had no time to think of the danger, for another stone sang past me as I hung 
by my hands from the edge of the ledge. " 

At a brisk trot the three friends left Cardillac and its wine-house behind 
them, riding without a halt past St. I think that I may arrive at my facts most 
directly by questioning you. Soames. "I can follow the other points," said he, 
"but really, in this matter of the length----" 

Holmes held out a small chip with the letters NN and a space of clear wood 
after them. If I am here at six it will do, I suppose?" 

"You must not be later," said Holmes. Sparking plugs are naval signals. " 

"From Portsmouth at midday," said the secretary, examining the superscription. 
There are several other indications, but these may be enough to aid us in our 
search. Here it is. There's a Booth boat for Para next Wednesday week, and if 
the Professor and you can work it, I think we should take it--what?  Very good, 
I'll fix it with him. It is evidently an empty flat to which the confederate 
has access. The bride gave me a sovereign, and I mean to wear it on my 
watch-chain in memory of the occasion. The whole place was turned upside down, 
drawers burst open, and presses ransacked, with the result that an odd volume 
of Pope's 'Homer,' two plated candlesticks, an ivory letter-weight, a small oak 
barometer, and a ball of twine are all that have vanished. 

As they approached the centre of the town the scene was brightened by a row of 
well-lit stores, and even more by a cluster of saloons and gaming houses, in 
which the miners spent their hard-earned but generous wages. 

What occurred was this. 

"'I suppose that you could not possibly whistle, yourself, in your sleep?' 

"'Certainly not. I was making my way through this at a point which was just out 
of sight of my companions, when, under one of the trees, I noticed something 
red huddled among the bushes. Then I stopped altogether, but he stopped also. " 

"Is it possible?" gasped the banker. "A fortnight--say at least a fortnight!" 

"'"A week," I repeated, "and you may consider yourself to have been very 
leniently dealt with. Johnson, the coal-owner, a very active gentleman, not 
older than yourself. " 

"Surely you are mistaken about his trade?" 

"No, sir! he has used this hotel for many years, and he is very well known to 
us. 

"There are stories of her which I would fain disbelieve--stories that she is 
sealed to some Gentile. Drebber leave your house for the train?' I asked. 

"'At eight o'clock,' she said, gulping in her throat to keep down her 
agitation. 

I shrugged my shoulders. "This was not the bird that I was looking for. " 

"But the twelve-mile drive?" gasped Hatherley. They know all they see at 
Godolphin Street. They cannot impinge upon one another. They call them many 
names, and they rule them this way or that but they are all English, for I can 
hear the voices of the people. They preferred to stand together and jabber all 
night in their queer Sikh lingo. 

"PERICOLO--pericolo--eh, what's that, Watson?  'Danger,' isn't it? Yes, by 
Jove, it's a danger signal. Musgrave still stood with a very pale face, 
swinging his lantern and peering down into the hole. 

"'These are coins of Charles the First,' said he, holding out the few which had 
been in the box; 'you see we were right in fixing our date for the Ritual. 

"My heart had turned to lead. I should remember that coat-armor, seeing that it 
is but three days since I looked upon it in the lists by Garonne. I was about 
to assure Miss Cushing that I was convinced that a mistake had been made when 
you may remember that I came suddenly to a stop. It is an open secret that the 
Duke's married life had not been a peaceful one, and the matter had ended in a 
separation by mutual consent, the Duchess taking up her residence in the south 
of France. When you have been a year with the Company you will think less of 
such matters. " 

"No, no. "There has been many a hammer murder and no trace on the hammer. But 
indeed and indeed it cannot be, so here I take my leave of you, for yonder 
square tower amongst the trees upon the right must surely be the church of 
Minstead, and I may reach it by this path through the woods. Say nothing of the 
hound to Sir Henry. " 

"Certainly not without your permission. 

"And I. "Good for you, Brother Baldwin," he said. Holmes? Tell me what to do. 
Watson and I have had occasion to solve. " 

"I'm not much of a story-teller," said our visitor, nervously clasping and 
unclasping his great, strong hands. " 

The English knight shook his head moodily. 

"We have seven more minutes," said he. Challenger and Summerlee had gone off 
together that day to the lake where some of the natives, under their direction, 
were engaged in harpooning specimens of the great lizards. 

"Of course," said he,  with his clumsy and ponderous sarcasm, "Professor 
Summerlee will understand that when I speak of a pterodactyl I mean a 
stork--only it is the kind of stork which has no feathers, a leathery skin, 
membranous wings, and teeth in its jaws. My old friend, Colonel Hayter, who had 
come under my professional care in Afghanistan, had now taken a house near 
Reigate in Surrey, and had frequently asked me to come down to him upon a 
visit. 

"'You awake, Jack!' she cried, with a nervous laugh. " As he spoke he unwrapped 
the grey shawl and extricated a pretty little girl of about five years of age, 
whose dainty shoes and smart pink frock with its little linen apron all bespoke 
a mother's care. Hardly had we reached the dark shadows before the step of the 
policeman was heard in the fog above. As its soft rhythm died away, Holmes set 
to work upon the lower door. His gaunt face, however, and his clothes, which 
hung so baggily over his shrivelled limbs, proclaimed what it was that gave him 
that senile and decrepit appearance. 

"Black hound of Gascony," he muttered, "evil the day that you and those like 
you set foot in free England! I know thy kennel of Rochecourt. It is something 
new for us to have visitors, is it not?  No love lost between us and our 
neighbors, is there?  If they could get rat poison into our baker's cart, I 
expect it would be there. The latter looked out with three tiers of vacant 
melancholy windows, which were blank and dreary, save that here and there a "To 
Let" card had developed like a cataract upon the bleared panes. But just there, 
Watson, I fancy that it could be done. Hall Pycroft. " 

"My God!" cried our client, "what a blind beetle I have been!" 

"Now you see the point about the handwriting. " 

"He is a bloody robber," said the trader, curtly, "and I wish I saw him kicking 
at the end of a halter. But I'll take the umbrella. On the other hand, he has 
endeavoured to conceal some of these stains upon the felt by daubing them with 
ink, which is a sign that he has not entirely lost his self-respect. A broken 
tip of lead was lying there also. " 

"By Jove, it's as clear as day!" cried the Colonel. But who--who in all this 
wide world could ever have imagined the incredible shape which that deed was to 
take, or the strange steps by which I was led to the doing of it? 

And, after all, this opening chapter will seem to the reader to have nothing to 
do with my narrative; and yet there would have been no narrative without it, 
for it is only when a man goes out into the world with the thought that there 
are heroisms all round him, and with the desire all alive in his heart to 
follow any which may come within sight of him, that he breaks away as I did 
from the life he knows, and ventures forth into the wonderful mystic twilight 
land where lie the great adventures and the great rewards. " 

"I am all attention," said Sherlock Holmes. " 

"Why not?" 

"Because he is not a fraud at all. "I've heard of you, Mr. He was at the gate 
when I came out, a-leanin' up agin the railings, and a-singin' at the pitch o' 
his lungs about Columbine's New-fangled Banner, or some such stuff. Then 
there's that wedding ring. You were recalling the incidents of Beecher's 
career. 

"Well, you need a word as well as a set of figures before you can get the lock 
to work. Lestrade, of Scotland Yard, very solemn and impressive, was ushered 
into our modest sitting-room. It is thought that Flora decoyed my wife out and 
laid some terrible trap for her. That dreadful sentinel sent a chill to my 
heart which I do not think that any burglar could have done. " 

"Mrs. 

"I saw the men before ever they came into the house," said she. The fellow is 
wary and cunning to the last degree. That heavy-faced cavalier who plucks his 
skirts and whispers in his ear is Lord Oliver de Clisson, known also as the 
butcher. Nor is it any better as three words AT, TEN, TA, unless T. Even as 
they passed, a great rock came thundering down with a hoarse rattle which woke 
the echoes in the silent gorges, and startled the weary horses into a gallop. " 

"But there is life upon the plateau all the same," his colleague replied in 
triumph. 

"He could not have gone far, sir bailiff," cried one of the archers, unslinging 
his bow. Already the first thin wisps of it were curling across the golden 
square of the lighted window. 

"Had we a rope," said Alleyne, "there is one side which is not yet on fire, 
down which we might slip. No man ever had a more faithful mate. How long would 
it take him to do that, using every possible contraction? A quarter of an hour, 
not less. " 

"Not more than a few minutes, sir. 

"Do you mean that you are on the right track?" he asked. Watson, with the 
treasure-box. " 

"It certainly did cross my mind that it might be a little dull--less for you, 
perhaps, than for your sister. " 

"And yet ere I have been here an hour I find Englishmen crawling about within 
it. Nay, my Lord Loring, it is whispered to me that there is another here who 
hath thought more deeply of it than you. But, indeed, Alleyne, this hath come 
suddenly upon me, and I scarce know what to say. You remember that Lewisham 
gang of burglars?" 

"What, the three Randalls?" 

"Exactly; the father and two sons. You never did fail me. 

Baynes flushed with pleasure. "There is another morass down yonder, and a 
narrow neck between. The first two, I need hardly remark, are the same who 
masqueraded as the Russian count and his son, so we can give a very full 
description of them. And yet I have made no use of it myself,--so blind and 
foolish a thing is avarice. Doran's house that morning. " 

"Ah, yes. Holmes, I supped there, as the vicar has said, and my elder brother 
George proposed a game of whist afterwards. " 

"Certainly, it was most interesting. In the middle of it was the black figure 
of the secretary, his head advanced, peering out into the night. His household 
consisted of his wife, his daughter, aged twenty, and two female servants. I 
fancy she knows more about this than appears. It was as if fate had placed him 
in my way that I might pay my debt before I left the island. I am really very 
sorry. " 

"What do you say, Watson?" 

I shrugged my shoulders. "My colleague, Mr. I don't say that we have fathomed 
it--far from it--but when we have traced the missing dumb-bell--" 

"The dumb-bell!" 

"Dear me, Watson, is it possible that you have not penetrated the fact that the 
case hangs upon the missing dumb-bell? Well, well, you need not be downcast; 
for between ourselves I don't think that either Inspector Mac or the excellent 
local practitioner has grasped the overwhelming importance of this incident. 
I'll swear it on a Bible. " 

"Well, well," said Holmes, "we'll talk about it when we've had something to 
eat. " 

The J. " 

The quick eye of my companion had noted some change in her manner. "You gave me 
such a fright. " 

"There's a half-sovereign for you," my companion said, standing up and taking 
his hat. Hall Pycroft, I believe?'" said he. It will be of use to me to hear 
the succession of events again. His hair and beard were white, save that the 
latter was curiously stained with yellow around his mouth. His tangled beard, 
grizzled hair, and outstanding, drooping eyebrows combined to give an air of 
dignity and power to his appearance, but his face was of an ashen white, while 
his lips and the corners of his nostrils were tinged with a shade of blue. He 
was flying like a racer. But I have heard, Mr. What do you deduce from it?" 

I carefully examined the writing, and the paper upon which it was written. And 
yet, in spite of all these disadvantages, there was a certain nobility in the 
woman's bearing--a gallantry in the defiant chin and in the upraised head, 
which compelled something of respect and admiration. " 

I had had so many reasons to believe in my friend's subtle powers of reasoning 
and extraordinary energy in action that I felt that he must have some solid 
grounds for the assured and easy demeanour with which he treated the singular 
mystery which he had been called upon to fathom. So you actually thought that I 
was the criminal?" 

"I did not know who you were, but I was determined to find out. Inside the 
house we were met by the elderly Cornish housekeeper, Mrs. The manager, a big 
blond German, received us civilly and gave a clear answer to all Holmes's 
questions. He saw that he was followed, no doubt, and used this means of giving 
me the slip. Well, no word was ever heard from him again. It is a small crop 
which we have gathered. This leads to his murder by someone who is, we will 
suppose, an avenger, someone from outside. The pencil was not an ordinary one. 
'  Well, what do you make of that?" 

He handed me the open book. 'I'm just off a two-yearer in an eight-knot tramp, 
short-handed at that, and I wants a rest. ' 

"'I fear there is not very much,' I answered; 'I might suggest that you have 
gone about in fear of some personal attack within the last twelvemonth. ) 'I 
need not remind this audience that, though Professor Summerlee, as the head of 
the Committee of Investigation, has been put up to speak to-night, still it is 
I who am the real prime mover in this business, and that it is mainly to me 
that any successful result must be ascribed. The Professor, with his face 
flushed, his nostrils dilated, and his beard bristling, was now in a proper 
Berserk mood. 

"I am delighted that you have come down, Mr. From the pressure of Holmes's 
shoulder against mine, I knew that he was sharing my observations. Leonard's, 
they had all turned their steps homewards. It had been no sudden call. John 
pored long and earnestly over the inscription upon the back, with his brows 
bent as one who bears up against great mental strain. It is past ten, however, 
and quite time that we started. " 

"Nay, friend, it is not the Frenchman's gold, but the Frenchman's blood that I 
would have. " 

"You suspect some one?" 

"I suspect myself. P. , taking the slip of paper and the pencil which Holmes 
handed to him. S. ," upon the lid. "This is indeed a fine sight upon which it 
is good to look, and a man might go far ere he would see so many brave men and 
fine horses. I can press it back, and here is the roof itself, sloping at a 
gentle angle. I can't say for certain, because it all depends--well, it all 
depends upon a factor which is completely outside our control. On examining it, 
however, I found that this deposit was a comparatively small one, and that it 
formed a link between two very much larger ones upon the right and left--both 
of them, however, in the grounds of my neighbours. If he braved the matter out, 
death would unfailingly come upon him, and usually in some strange and 
unforeseen manner. You can do what you will, but I must remain on guard. 4. You 
told me, four weeks ago, that Thurston had an option on some South African 
property which would expire in a month, and which he desired you to share with 
him. " 

"I am all attention, madam. " 

"I suppose you have everything ready to leave. Hush and hearken! for they are 
no great way from us. " 

The Company stood peering into the dense fog-wreath, amidst a silence so 
profound that the dripping of the water from the rocks and the breathing of the 
horses grew loud upon the ear. I haven't let the grass grow under my feet. " 

She swept across the room and seated herself with her back to the window. "The 
thing, however, is, as you say, of the simplest. We must have some sign or 
warrant of your mission. Mortimer. Supposing that anything happened to our 
young friend here--you will forgive the unpleasant hypothesis!--who would 
inherit the estate?" 

"Since Rodger Baskerville, Sir Charles's younger brother died unmarried, the 
estate would descend to the Desmonds, who are distant cousins. James Desmond is 
an elderly clergyman in Westmoreland. 

"You have come to see his Grace? I am sorry, but the fact is that the Duke is 
far from well. At present my attention was centred upon the single grim 
motionless figure which lay stretched upon the boards, with vacant sightless 
eyes staring up at the discoloured ceiling. A volunteer corps of clerks and 
merchants had been formed, and this I joined, wooden leg and all. After that we 
abandoned all attempt at communication. About two in the morning I was seated 
by the window, all being dark save for the moonlight outside, when I heard 
steps behind me, and there was my wife in her dressing-gown. You saw her return 
by the kitchen door, I presume?" 

"Yes; when I went to see if the door was fastened for the night I met her 
slipping in. Anyhow, I'd as soon die with a rope round my neck as with Black 
Peter's knife in my heart. I'll tell you this, that when I was put upon this 
job I never believed there was such a society as yours. " 

Our official detectives may blunder in the matter of intelligence, but never in 
that of courage. Holmes, than you would probably do if you were brought into 
personal contact with these things. " 

He made the announcement as if the name alone would explain both his visit and 
its manner, but I could see, by my companion's unresponsive face, that it meant 
no more to him than to me. What else?" 

"When we secure the men we shall get the treasure. " 

"Where was Mr. I give you my solemn word upon that. " 

"There's no doubt about the authenticity, for the name and the date, 1647, are 
on the back of the canvas. " 

"I trust that you don't consider your collection closed. "Had He wished help," 
he said, "He could have summoned legions of archangels from heaven, so what 
need had He of your poor bow and arrow? Besides, bethink you of His own 
words--that those who live by the sword shall perish by the sword. " 

"And how could man die better?" asked the archer. " 

"What a man it is!  What did you do?" 

"Well, he became more reasonable and we had a chat. " 

His revolver cracked, and I saw the blood spurt from the front of Woodley's 
waistcoat. Therein lies our salvation. Our search is narrowed down to 
standardized books which anyone may be supposed to possess. " 

He quickened his pace until we had decreased the distance which divided us by 
about half. Look at it in this light. " 

"But about this stranger," said I. " 

"I can see that you have a strong, natural turn for this sort of thing. It was 
no mere form for either of them. Is there any point which is not quite clear to 
you?" 

"The object of the mulatto cook's return?" 

"I think that the strange creature in the kitchen may account for it. The agent 
may be caught. From one of these I picked a battle-axe, and then, leaving my 
candle behind me, I crept on tiptoe down the passage and peeped in at the open 
door. If this man were inside it I should find out from his own lips, at the 
point of my revolver if necessary, who he was and why he had dogged us so long. 
I could stand that, Mr. There was the original problem:  that at least was 
pretty clear now. They were all three standing in a knot in front of the altar. 
I heard that Barclay had married Nancy, and that he was rising rapidly in the 
regiment, but even that did not make me speak. " 

"I will compress the story as far as may be done without omitting anything 
vital to the case. "The ancient chain of the township of Lepe! This is but a 
sorry jest, Sir Nigel. " 

"True, my good Aylward; but I have learned from this worthy knight, who hath 
come over the French marches, that there is a company of Englishmen who are 
burning and plundering in the country round Villefranche. " 

"Quite so. He was a tall and stately person, scrupulously dressed, with a 
drawn, thin face, and a nose which was grotesquely curved and long. Let us see 
if we can get a glimpse of him. This Thaddeus Sholto WAS with his brother; 
there WAS a quarrel; so much we know. A clump of copper beeches immediately in 
front of the hall door has given its name to the place. Shortly after Peter 
Carey gave up the sea, and it was long years before I could find where he was. 
Dr. Mortimer turned the manuscript to the light and read in a high, cracking 
voice the following curious, old-world narrative: 



"Of the origin of the Hound of the Baskervilles there 

have been many statements, yet as I come in a direct 

line from Hugo Baskerville, and as I had the story from 

my father, who also had it from his, I have set it down 

with all belief that it occurred even as is here set 

forth. Supposing that anything happened to our young friend here--you will 
forgive the unpleasant hypothesis!--who would inherit the estate?" 

"Since Rodger Baskerville, Sir Charles's younger brother died unmarried, the 
estate would descend to the Desmonds, who are distant cousins. James Desmond is 
an elderly clergyman in Westmoreland. Little did I think that this would be the 
prelude to the most crushing misfortune of my life. 







THE GREAT AWAKENING 



And now I come to the end of this extraordinary incident, so overshadowing in 
its importance, not only in our own small, individual lives, but in the general 
history of the human race. This is very interesting. " 

"How did he come?" 

"In answer to an advertisement. "And this is Thursday morning. Why didn't you 
go down yesterday?" 

"Because I made a blunder, my dear Watson--which is, I am afraid, a more common 
occurrence than any one would think who only knew me through your memoirs. I 
fancy she knew something, for I may have dropped a word here or a word there; 
but until yesterday, after you gentlemen had seen her, she never knew the 
rights of the matter. He lay on his back, his knees drawn up, and his mouth 
horribly open. His reasons for destroying the busts were still unknown, and he 
refused to answer any questions upon the subject, but the police had discovered 
that these same busts might very well have been made by his own hands, since he 
was engaged in this class of work at the establishment of Gelder & Co. 

"They have laid the supper, then," he said, rubbing his hands. Hynes Hynes, J. 
P. , taking the slip of paper and the pencil which Holmes handed to him. " 

The old soldiers and Hordle John strode off together in all good fellowship. 
THE ADVENTURE OF THE COPPER BEECHES 

"To the man who loves art for its own sake," remarked Sherlock Holmes, tossing 
aside the advertisement sheet of the Daily Telegraph, "it is frequently in its 
least important and lowliest manifestations that the keenest pleasure is to be 
derived. His face was disturbed and troubled, while his clothes were 
disarranged and untidy. A gilt harp, blotched with many stains and with two of 
its strings missing, was tucked under one of his arms, while with the other he 
scooped greedily at his platter. 

"Well, there was one thing which very soon struck me, and that was that the 
soldiers used always to lose and the civilians to win. As a matter of course I 
did the same. He therefore accosted him when he got up to him, with the object 
of finding out what Lucy Ferrier's fate had been. The country roads seem to be 
not very good in that part of the world, for we lurched and jolted terribly. " 
As he spoke the seamen came swarming on to the poop and the forecastle to avoid 
the torrent which poured through the huge leak into the waist. " 

"Well, it cannot be far if Barrymore had to carry out the food to it. "You 
won't stand it, eh?" 

"Don't be such a fool, Professor!" I cried. Know then that if these rows were 
dug up the wealth of the country would be gone, and mayhap there would be dry 
throats and gaping mouths in England, for in three months' time these black 
roots will blossom and shoot and burgeon, and from them will come many a good 
ship-load of Medoc and Gascony which will cross the narrow seas. " 

"Your doubts, Sir Oliver, shall soon be resolved," answered the prince, 
laughing heartily, as did many of the barons who surrounded them. " 

"It is clearly some sort of script," said Challenger. Its shrill and piercing 
cries drew all eyes upon it, and, as it came nearer, a dark spot which circled 
above it resolved itself into a peregrine falcon, which hovered over its head, 
poising itself from time to time, and watching its chance of closing with its 
clumsy quarry. Once only we saw a trace that someone had passed that perilous 
way before us. In vain were sword-sheaths, apple-branches and belts linked 
together thrown out to him by his companions. They advanced rapidly and 
noiselessly, with the confidence and dexterity of practised scouts. At any 
rate, it was there, and I was keenly on the lookout for any chance to pass the 
forbidden door. At Blackwall we could not have been more than two hundred and 
fifty. Up and down went the long, shining blades, round and round they circled 
in curves of glimmering light, crossing, meeting, disengaging, with flash of 
sparks at every parry. 

In the early dawn I woke with a start, and was surprised to find him standing 
by my bedside, clad in a rude sailor dress with a pea-jacket, and a coarse red 
scarf round his neck. There was a noise somewhere within the house. Gennaro saw 
our enemy's cruel face smiling at him as he dipped his hand in the bag. He 
pushed his way in, seized me in his mighty arms, hugged me in his bear's 
embrace, covered me with kisses, and implored me to come away with him. If you 
will have the kindness to hold the lamp for me, we shall now extend our 
researches to the room above,--the secret room in which the treasure was found. 
No, it was for something in that wooden bureau. Here--here"--and he beat his 
great head with his huge, hairy fist--"there is something which uses matter, 
but is not of it--something which might destroy death, but which death can 
never destroy. " 

"Talkin' of death," said Lord John. " 

"I'm too ill to think. 

"You can't help it, my dear Watson. You can't, as a man of science, defend such 
a position as that. But is not that my Lord Delewar who waves to us? Ha! my 
fair lord, God and Our Lady be with you! And there is Sir Robert Cheney. " She 
tore from the bosom of her dress a small packet. 

"Oh, I don't mind telling a story against myself. "You have got him! Where is 
he, then?" 

"He is here. I have money enough and to spare. The Indian could bear this back 
to the world. Each is now in a position to watch the other and to bring the 
experiment to an end should the symptoms seem alarming. It may be that when we 
reach Para we shall stop to refit. 

"Here is Herr Heidegger, sure enough!" cried Holmes, exultantly. 

He looked about him in the slow methodical fashion of old age. Baldwin and 
Cormac were already half-drunk, and the liquor had brought out all their 
ferocity. 

"You'll kill the man," said he. "Where did you get that dog-cart? Pull up, 
man!" he yelled, drawing a pistol from his side "Pull up, I say, or, by George, 
I'll put a bullet into your horse. " 

"Over the cliff with him!" shouted half a dozen voices; but ere the archers 
could drag him from the rocks to which he clung Sir Nigel had ridden up and 
called upon them to stop. "It may seem to point very straight to one thing, but 
if you shift your own point of view a little, you may find it pointing in an 
equally uncompromising manner to something entirely different. Oh, but I have 
been sorely tried this day!" 

Our companion patted her thin, work-worn hand, and murmured some few words of 
kindly womanly comfort which brought the color back into the others bloodless 
cheeks. " 

"It was a small thing," he answered, with a tingle of pleasure at these sweet 
words of praise. "There is my horse and my lady's jennet. " 

Gregson had a stretcher and four men at hand. But if you could have stopped, I 
might possibly have been able to return with you in a day or two. I only wish 
to verify my details in one way, which can very readily be done, and then I 
make my bow and return to London, leaving my results entirely at your service. 
" 

"Nor," said Lord John, "is there much doubt as to how he met his death. " 

"Your sister asked for it, I suppose?" 

"No, I never heard of her using it. " 

"Then I think we had better hear their story at once. To a poor bookworm and 
invalid like myself such a blow is paralyzing. 

Erected by Sir Balwin de Redvers in the old fighting days of the twelfth 
century, when men thought much of war and little of comfort, Castle Twynham had 
been designed as a stronghold pure and simple, unlike those later and more 
magnificent structures where warlike strength had been combined with the 
magnificence of a palace. "I'll answer for that. I understood that he had 
opened his campaign against Charles Augustus Milverton, but I little dreamed 
the strange shape which that campaign was destined to take. For three years I 
have kept her existence a secret from you, but I heard from the nurse, and I 
knew that all was well with her. Then, glancing quickly round, he straightened 
himself out and burst into a hearty fit of laughter. Both she and her husband 
had occupied the bed. If ever they were exerted it would be now. On the issue 
of this question depended whether I should continue my work at Briony Lodge, or 
turn my attention to the gentleman's chambers in the Temple. All seems very 
quiet now," he added, peering out of the window. Fuzzy little black-velvet 
monkeys, with snow-white teeth and gleaming, mocking eyes, chattered at us as 
we passed. With a dull, heavy splash an occasional cayman plunged in from the 
bank. 

"What's up, then?" asked Holmes with a twinkle in his eye. 

"Stint it, Humphrey," said the tall squire, with a burst of laughter. We have 
had great good fortune in France, and it hath led to much bobance and camp-fire 
talk, but I have ever noticed that those who know the most have the least to 
say about it. Better far that your bones should bleach in this wilderness than 
that you should prove to be that little speck of decay which in time corrupts 
the whole fruit. Will you come with us on these terms?" 

"Guess I'll come with you on any terms," said Ferrier, with such emphasis that 
the grave Elders could not restrain a smile. I must just take one look round. 
Yet there were two thoughts which sealed the words of affection upon my lips. 
The Lady Loring, and the Lady Maude, thy fair daughter, are in good health; and 
so also am I, save for an imposthume of the toe-joint, which hath been sent me 
for my sins. By nine o'clock we were all seated in the study, waiting patiently 
for our man. " 

"I thought I remembered your face. Simon said something about 'jumping a claim. 
' 

"It is dated from Grosvenor Mansions, written with a quill pen, and the noble 
lord has had the misfortune to get a smear of ink upon the outer side of his 
right little finger," remarked Holmes as he folded up the epistle. 

"'Next Monday I have a large sum due to me, and I shall then most certainly 
repay what you advance, with whatever interest you think it right to charge. 
His keen face, with those unforgettable eyes, so fierce and yet so humorous, 
flushed with pleasure at the sight of us. 

Yet upon that afternoon, whether it was the Beaune which I had taken with my 
lunch, or the additional exasperation produced by the extreme deliberation of 
his manner, I suddenly felt that I could hold out no longer. When my uncle 
became foreign minister in this administration he gave me several missions of 
trust, and as I always brought them to a successful conclusion, he came at last 
to have the utmost confidence in my ability and tact. 

"When I came to examine the address of the packet I observed that it was to 
Miss S. 

"Reginald Musgrave sat down opposite to me, and lit the cigarette which I had 
pushed towards him. Methinks, Alleyne, it is this learning which you have 
taught her that has taken all the life and sap from her. It is more than she 
can master, like a heavy spear to a light rider. Holmes halted and looked 
earnestly at the window. We saw you when we returned from Tunbridge Wells last 
night, and you were in general agreement with our results. 

"They didn't go to the house. "Our archery is over-good, and they will not 
close. All he wants is an old dog to help him to do the running down. At last 
man was to be supreme and the man-beast to find forever his allotted place. The 
strangers took that which led to the Crow Hill, a huge business which was in 
strong hands which had been able, thanks to their energetic and fearless New 
England manager, Josiah H. I kept to the pavement after that, Watson, but as I 
walked down Vere Street a brick came down from the roof of one of the houses, 
and was shattered to fragments at my feet. That's how I loved Mary Fraser. " 

"Jonathan Wild wasn't a detective, and he wasn't in a novel. There is a stove. 
Have you seen the evening paper?" 

"No. Holmes edged his way round the wall and flinging the shutters together, he 
bolted them securely. We picked up the scent at Charing Cross Post-Office and 
came on here. It is a case of taking the man. But suddenly they started forward 
in a rigid, fixed stare, and his lips parted in amazement. He paced restlessly 
about our sitting-room in a fever of suppressed energy, biting his nails, 
tapping the furniture, and chafing against inaction. On the other hand, if I 
should find the hut and its tenant should not be within it I must remain there, 
however long the vigil, until he returned. 

As the weeks went by, my interest in him and my curiosity as to his aims in 
life, gradually deepened and increased. "One other thing, Lestrade," he added, 
turning round at the door: "'Rache,' is the German for 'revenge;' so don't lose 
your time looking for Miss Rachel. " 

It was indeed evident that this man stood apart from the others, and that they 
never ventured to address him without every sign of deep respect. Save, 
perhaps, that. And yet this John Openshaw seems to me to be walking amid even 
greater perils than did the Sholtos. Is it not pitiful? And here I find you, a 
man of sense, boggling about terms, when your client's future and honour are at 
stake. Marker there?" 

A sad-faced, elderly woman came into the room. The professor declares that he 
heard the distant cry, but that he knows nothing more. Occasional brooks with 
pebbly bottoms and fern-draped banks gurgled down the shallow gorges in the 
hill, and offered good camping-grounds every evening on the banks of some 
rock-studded pool, where swarms of little blue-backed fish, about the size and 
shape of English trout, gave us a delicious supper. 

On the ninth day after leaving the canoes, having done, as I reckon, about a 
hundred and twenty miles, we began to emerge from the trees, which had grown 
smaller until they were mere shrubs. 

"Well, Holmes," said Athelney Jones, "You are a man to be humored, and we all 
know that you are a connoisseur of crime, but duty is duty, and I have gone 
rather far in doing what you and your friend asked me. Daily Telegraph agony 
column by the print and paper. Right-hand top corner of a page. No dates--but 
messages arrange themselves. They had imagined, that I was lost in the woods, 
and had fired this shot to guide me home. I took two steps forward and looked 
back. He sprang to his feet and gave me a hand to rise, while Challenger picked 
up his wife and laid her on the settee. 

"He was in the house about half an hour, and I could catch glimpses of him in 
the windows of the sitting-room, pacing up and down, talking excitedly, and 
waving his arms. Open it!" 

From out of her bosom Lady Hilda had drawn a small key. Holmes struck the door 
just over the lock with the flat of his foot and it flew open. "I expect, as 
usual, he knows a good deal that we don't. Where is the letter?" 

She darted across to a writing-desk, unlocked it, and drew out a long blue 
envelope. " 

"Have you been in it since your adventure?" 

"No, I came straight away for you. But at least you cannot say the same of 
mine. There is a woman, two women, who stand upon the walls, and give heart to 
the men-at-arms. But what was she to do? How could she, a young and timid 
woman, make her way into such a place and pluck her husband out from among the 
ruffians who surrounded him? 

There was the case, and of course there was but one way out of it. I did it, 
Mr. The situation seemed beyond all words or comments. Now, a real German 
invariably prints in the Latin character, so that we may safely say that this 
was not written by one, but by a clumsy imitator who overdid his part. Holmes, 
it's half-past eleven now and I am going back right away to my hotel. I feel 
sure that if Sir Charles could have spoken with me before his death he would 
have warned me against bringing this, the last of the old race, and the heir to 
great wealth, to that deadly place. " 

"I am glad to hear you say so," said Holmes gravely. I will make the 
announcement later. 

"From this starting-point I proceeded to step, having first taken the cardinal 
points by my pocket-compass. Holmes, that you are under some absurd illusion. " 

"It seems to me that you have been very shamefully treated," said Holmes. Its 
splendour was in such contrast to his homely ways and simple life that I could 
not help commenting upon it. 

A change had come over Holmes's manner. Then he bethought him that there was 
one beside him who was fitter to judge on such a matter. I started a drygoods 
store on Market Square, and I prospered well. The driver looked twice at such a 
shabby fare, but I jumped in before he could object. I had stooped and was 
scraping at this to see exactly what it was when I heard a muttered exclamation 
in German and saw the cadaverous face of the colonel looking down at me. Yet 
she would not take back the words either, nor would she grant the veil. What do 
we find? A few cattle-tracks, nothing more. We after the convict, and a 
hell-hound, as likely as not, after us. Could you swear to that man's face 
within the cab?" 

"I could swear only to the beard. " 

The young clerk smiled at his companion's earnestness. 

"Watch and see, young fool's-head," growled the old bowman. Holmes?" he asked. 

"Well, in investigating this minor affair we must not lose sight of our main 
inquiry. Better to sleep here at this inn, and then travel on to Minstead in 
the morning. If his brother would take him in, well and good. The lady who has 
passed here as Miss Stapleton is in reality his wife. One door and the window 
frame had been plastered round with varnished paper so as to be practically 
sealed. The servants had left the kitchen. He could examine the papers in his 
own office. The lady, against whom naturally the strongest suspicion rested, 
was removed to her room, still in a state of insensibility. It was littered 
with books and papers, and was evidently used as a study. He runs after us, a 
puffing, red-faced, irascible figure. ' Mayhap he will sing it when the ale has 
warmed him. 'And how that?' asked Simon. ' 

"'And the work?' 

"'Is purely nominal. So he went off cursing, like the foul-mouthed blackguard 
that he was, and swearing that he would have her yet. A large face, seared with 
a thousand wrinkles, burned yellow with the sun, and marked with every evil 
passion, was turned from one to the other of us, while his deep-set, bile-shot 
eyes, and his high, thin, fleshless nose, gave him somewhat the resemblance to 
a fierce old bird of prey. Within the gates Lestrade met us, his face flushed 
with victory, his manner grossly triumphant. From beyond it came such a Babel 
of hooting and screaming, horrible oaths and yet more horrible laughter, that 
the stoutest heart might have shrunk from casting down the frail barrier which 
faced them. As Alleyne walked up to it he perceived that it was rudely 
fashioned out of beams of wood, with twinkling lights all over where the glow 
from within shone through the chinks. "Why, you were doin' a music-hall turn of 
imitations all the way--more like a runaway gramophone than a man. " 

"You! I vould never have had you in my house if I had known it--not if you vere 
to pay me a hundred dollar a veek. I have jotted down the form here, if you 
would not mind signing it. When you have finished, relock both the original and 
the draft in the desk, and hand them over to me personally to-morrow morning. 
For my own part, I had followed step by step the methods by which he had traced 
the various windings of this complex case, and, though I could not yet perceive 
the goal which we would reach, I understood clearly that Holmes expected this 
grotesque criminal to make an attempt upon the two remaining busts, one of 
which, I remembered, was at Chiswick. At the next he had shaken it off and saw 
only his duty towards intrusive strangers. Our guide knocked, and then ushered 
us into the professor's bedroom. Mortimer was shown up, followed by the young 
baronet. "My wife is expecting me. " 

The two detectives stared at him in amazement. " 

"We must ask about this right away. I agree with you that complete frankness, 
however painful it may be to me, is the best policy in this desperate situation 
to which James's folly and jealousy have reduced us. Look at that!" 

He held out his hand. It was blowing a gale of wind; but because he was 
announced to go he insisted on starting. What do you make of that, Watson?" 

"He is deeply interested. But _we_ know. " 

"My master will not drink," said the squire. If she seemed to be senseless, 
they would not take her life. He was gagged before he could give the alarm, and 
tied down upon the bed. My word, what a theme for him!  "Standing in the little 
gallery under the dome and looking down upon that packed mass of despairing 
humanity, groveling at this last instant before a Power which they had so 
persistently ignored, there rose to my ears from the swaying crowd such a low 
moan of entreaty and terror, such a shuddering cry for help to the Unknown, 
that----" and so forth. " 

"A simple case, and yet, in some ways, an instructive one," Holmes remarked, as 
we travelled back to town. 

"Never mind," said he, chuckling to himself. Last night we all supped at Lord 
John Roxton's rooms, and sitting together afterwards we smoked in good 
comradeship and talked our adventures over. What I did and how I succeeded, you 
have already learned. He who carries himself best of the victors hath the 
prize, and he who is judged best of the other party hath a jewelled clasp. 
Perhaps it would be best for you if you never heard from the fellow at all. God 
He knows that I am unworthy of such honor, yet I can show my four-and-sixty 
quarterings, and I have been present at some bickerings and scufflings during 
these twenty years. It was but last week that, having to raise some money, I 
called up to the castle Jean Goubert, who, as all men know, has a casketful of 
gold pieces hidden away in some hollow tree. So long as I followed it down I 
must come to the lake, and so long as I followed it back I must come to the 
camp. But we are honor bound to go back and have them out or see it through 
with them. " 

"Ah, yes, of course! Well, a cheetah is just a big cat, and yet a saucer of 
milk does not go very far in satisfying its wants, I daresay. It is well to be 
prepared. Watson there would tell you that I was a nervous, sensitive boy at 
school. Oh, excuse me an instant! It is surely Cyclopides. I loathe him with 
all my heart; but I fear him also. " 

I took it up and glanced at it. "This is very piquant. Cover him, Patrolman, 
while I disarm him. " 

"There's my pistol," said McMurdo coolly. I could swear to it. Jaracaca Swamp 
we named it in the map which we are constructing. 

The cliffs upon the farther side had lost their ruddy tint, being 
chocolate-brown in color; the vegetation was more scattered along the top of 
them, and they had sunk to three or four hundred feet in height, but in no 
place did we find any point where they could be ascended. Each pigeon-hole had 
its label, and his eyes as he glanced along them read a long series of such 
titles as "Fords," "Harbour-defences," "Aeroplanes," "Ireland," "Egypt," 
"Portsmouth forts," "The Channel," "Rosythe," and a score of others. Steel 
caps, mail brigandines, white surcoats with the red lion of St. George, and 
sword or battle-axe swinging from their belts, completed this equipment, while 
in some cases the murderous maule or five-foot mallet was hung across the 
bowstave, being fastened to their leathern shoulder-belt by a hook in the 
centre of the handle. A meeting of the Guild had been held that evening at 
eight, and Mrs. In the open plain clouds of light horse galloped and swooped 
with swaying bodies and waving javelins, after the fashion which the Spanish 
had adopted from their Moorish enemies. But the central power which uses the 
agent is never caught--never so much as suspected. Holmes, that you can see 
deeply into the manifold wickedness of the human heart. " 

After an hour's delay, the great nobleman appeared. "If you had helped justice, 
instead of thwarting it in this way, you would have had a better chance at your 
trial. Crime is common. Logic is rare. Therefore it is upon the logic rather 
than upon the crime that you should dwell. John Douglas himself could be, and 
the balance of probability was that with the connivance of his wife and his 
friend he was concealed in a house which had such conveniences for a fugitive, 
and awaiting quieter times when he could make his final escape. It was not 
merely that Holmes changed his costume. But its general shape must be what I 
have indicated, and it can run up a curtain, and it is carnivorous. Miss Burnet 
has not been seen by any human eye since the night of the murder. " 

He gave a most dismal groan. " 

"Every man to his own humor," said Pedro carelessly. "To any one who wishes to 
study mankind this is the spot," said Mycroft. Culverton Smith was good enough 
to give our signal by turning up the gas. Through the half-open door I heard a 
high, petulant, penetrating voice. 

The nocturnal visitor was a young man, frail and thin, with a black moustache, 
which intensified the deadly pallor of his face. The Lascar was known to be a 
man of the vilest antecedents, but as, by Mrs. " 

"When?" 

"The body was found at six on Tuesday morning. "If you saw a single man lying 
on that floor with his chest knocked in and a hole in his face it would turn 
you sick. It was evidently a term of reproach. Farewell, and may God be with 
you!" She held out her white, slim hand to him, but as he bent his lips over it 
she whisked away and was gone, leaving in his outstretched hand the very green 
veil for which poor Peter Terlake had craved in vain. Again the hoarse cheering 
burst out from below, and he heard the clang of the rising portcullis. For 
years I have endeavored to break through the veil which shrouded it, and at 
last the time came when I seized my thread and followed it, until it led me, 
after a thousand cunning windings, to ex-Professor Moriarty of mathematical 
celebrity. 

"He has gone to fetch some water," said Lord Roxton. I noted him, and the 
energy with which he walked but he passed from my mind again as I hurried on 
upon my errand. 

"'See here,' said the operator after he'd gone out, 'I guess we should charge 
double rates for this. " 

A minute later we were in the street and walking for home. It's all the same to 
me. Warren's lodger. It sounds plausible, does it not?  The mysterious one 
could understand English, even if he could not print it. " 

"Your nerve, Walters?  I should not have thought you had a nerve in your body. 

"And what do you think of it all, Watson?" asked Sherlock Holmes, leaning back 
in his chair. "You've pulled us all out of the jaws of death. My word! it was a 
good bit of work!" 

"Admirable!" cried Challenger. He knew I was in the swim down here, and asked 
me to pick up a good man cheap. With his personal advantages and his 
extraordinary gifts--for he can speak several languages and play nearly every 
musical instrument--it is wonderful that he should have been satisfied so long 
in such a position, but I suppose that he was comfortable, and lacked energy to 
make any change. They plodded along together, the woodman and Alleyne, with 
little talk on either side, for their thoughts were as far asunder as the 
poles. The only remaining point was what they were burrowing for. It is the 
constant index of our limitations. Meanwhile, you change nothing--nothing at 
all. You stand wide, Mr. " 

"My own hobby has always been nervous disease. With a manner which plainly 
showed his appreciation of the immense gravity of the occasion, the celebrated 
physician refused to admit that every avenue of hope had been closed. To my 
astonishment it was Sherlock Holmes who stood upon my step. " 

"I am strongly of the same opinion," cried Summerlee. It's Scowrers here and 
Scowrers there, and always in a whisper! What are you all afraid of? Who are 
the Scowrers?" 

The boarding-house keeper instinctively sank his voice, as everyone did who 
talked about that terrible society. I've had my share of adventures in my life, 
and as many thrills as most folk, but I'm endin' on my top note. But as to the 
horror with which universal death appears to inspire you, I would put it to you 
that it is somewhat exaggerated. There I was stretched, when you, my dear 
Watson, and all your following were investigating in the most sympathetic and 
inefficient manner the circumstances of my death. But one false statement was 
made by Barrymore at the inquest. See the rising sun flashes full upon it and 
sparkles on the golden lions. There is goose-grease in a box, if the old scars 
ache at the turn of the weather. 

"My way ran down a dried-up watercourse, which we hoped would screen me from 
the enemy's sentries; but as I crept round the corner of it I walked right into 
six of them, who were crouching down in the dark waiting for me. We may have 
traveled two or three miles in all, keeping to the right of the line of the 
stream, when we came upon a considerable opening in the trees. " 

"But I am all in the dark. As he said, what interest could anyone have in 
bringing me to the doors of the church, and then leaving me? Now, if he had 
borrowed my money, or if he had married me and got my money settled on him, 
there might be some reason, but Hosmer was very independent about money and 
never would look at a shilling of mine. Under the stress of famine or of 
conquest they have made their way up here. The hasp sprang open with a loud 
snap. I held my bedroom candle lit in my hand, and, by its light, behind the 
first man I saw two others, who were in the act of entering. They told me it 
was to do with the Freemen; so I went to Chicago and was made one. I examined 
them with care, and there was no doubt that they were trouser buttons. You will 
find me at the police-station. This lady is a musician. We must have a look at 
it. " 

"That's just gossip--I want proof!" said McMurdo. I think that I am fairly 
justified in my inferences. 

"What brought all his wicked scheme to wreck was your discovery of this man 
Heidegger's dead body. Gennaro was able to do a service to an Italian 
gentleman--he saved him from some ruffians in the place called the Bowery, and 
so made a powerful friend. At first I thought that it was dislike. It was that 
of a man about forty-three or forty-four years of age, middle-sized, broad 
shouldered, with crisp curling black hair, and a short stubbly beard. It is no 
wonder that he and his family have some of the more implacable spirits upon 
their track. She and all the firemen smelled the burned flesh from inside it. 
It must have been this morning, or the mark would not remain clear upon the 
finger. If I remember rightly, you on one occasion, in the early days of our 
friendship, defined my limits in a very precise fashion. " 

I have so deep a respect for the extraordinary qualities of Holmes that I have 
always deferred to his wishes, even when I least understood them. 

"Yes; he has followed my father's custom. Luke's day had come and had gone, and 
it was in the season of Martinmas, when the oxen are driven in to the 
slaughter, that the White Company was ready for its journey. Can you do without 
breakfast?" 

"Certainly. " 

"That little lot will do no good, but I expect their search parties are all 
over the wood. But you see, sir, them's not our geese. And always, apart from 
the hound, there is the fact of the human agency in London, the man in the cab, 
and the letter which warned Sir Henry against the moor. " 

"You have saved my life. A moment later we were out on the dark road, a chill 
wind blowing in our faces, and one yellow light twinkling in front of us 
through the gloom to guide us on our sombre errand. I proceed, then, from the 
morning which followed our abortive chase of the convict and our other strange 
experiences upon the moor. Another cyclist could have had nothing to do with 
the actual murder, nor were there any human foot-marks. Surely this is the 
beginning of a second word. Why should you, for a mere passing pleasure, risk 
the loss of those great powers with which you have been endowed? Remember that 
I speak not only as one comrade to another, but as a medical man to one for 
whose constitution he is to some extent answerable. " 

"Why do you not solve it yourself, Mycroft?  You can see as far as I. Is it 
possible that even now, when I give you these results, you are unable to see 
how they are attained?" 

"I have no doubt that I am very stupid, but I must confess that I am unable to 
follow you. " 

"'Tis the badge of Tete-noire, the Norman," cried a seaman-mariner. But his 
eyes, like my own, are the worse for wars. " 

As he spoke there was a tap at the door, and the boy in buttons entered to 
announce Miss Mary Sutherland, while the lady herself loomed behind his small 
black figure like a full-sailed merchant-man behind a tiny pilot boat. He said 
that he was a detective, and he offered me two guineas if I would do exactly 
what he wanted all day and ask no questions. He is said to have about seven 
lawsuits upon his hands at present, which will probably swallow up the 
remainder of his fortune and so draw his sting and leave him harmless for the 
future. He is one of two who have a key of the safe. His whole life appears to 
be spent in an alternation between savage fits of passion and gloomy intervals 
of sulking. There were no signs of violence upon any of these garments, and 
there were no other traces of Mr. Mark well the man with the high nose and 
flaxen beard who hath placed his hand upon the shoulder of the dark hard-faced 
cavalier in the rust-stained jupon. " 

"Aye, by St. 

The young fellow seemed pleased at the suggestion, and his dark eyes sparkled 
with pleasure. That is hardly true. You can think that I looked out when I came 
to Charlington Heath, and there, sure enough, was the man, exactly as he had 
been the two weeks before. I can't afford, therefore, to smile at your three 
broken busts, Lestrade, and I shall be very much obliged to you if you will let 
me hear of any fresh development of so singular a chain of events. We have had 
inquiries made as to any stranger seen on the country roads or at the railway 
station. " 

It was midday when we found ourselves at the scene of the tragedy, and, under 
my companion's guidance, we made our way at once to Hudson Street. We should be 
rich men if we had 1000 pounds for every poor devil who has been done to death 
in that den. What has happened since then to give you a completely new idea of 
the case?" 

"Well, since you ask me, I spent, as I told you that I would, some hours last 
night at the Manor House. "My life has been too quiet, I am not used to such 
sights. Thus we find such modern creatures as the tapir--an animal with quite a 
respectable length of pedigree--the great deer, and the ant-eater in the 
companionship of reptilian forms of jurassic type. 

His wife, too, was popular with those who had made her acquaintance; though, 
after the English fashion, the callers upon a stranger who settled in the 
county without introductions were few and far between. Methinks, Alleyne, it is 
this learning which you have taught her that has taken all the life and sap 
from her. It is more than she can master, like a heavy spear to a light rider. 
' 

"'Very likely. ' 

"'No, no, we should have him loitering here always. A groan of disappointment 
came up from below, and the folk all trooped away in different directions until 
there was not a red-head to be seen except my own and that of the manager. It 
was clear enough to see for some distance, but Thaddeus Sholto took down one of 
the side-lamps from the carriage to give us a better light upon our way. The 
clang of blows, the cries of the stricken, the short, deep shout of the 
islanders, and the fierce whoops of the rovers, rose together in a deafening 
tumult, while the breath of the panting men went up in the wintry air like the 
smoke from a furnace. Back and forward reeled the leopard banner, now borne up 
the slope by the rush and weight of the onslaught, now pushing downwards again 
as Sir Nigel, Burley, and Black Simon with their veteran men-at arms, flung 
themselves madly into the fray. No one knows how these things are worked. Well, 
you shall hear from me to-morrow. St. Clair walked slowly, glancing about in 
the hope of seeing a cab, as she did not like the neighbourhood in which she 
found herself. He took a large villa, laid out the grounds very nicely, and 
lived generally in good style. " 

For all the preposterous hat and the vacuous face, there was something noble in 
the simple faith of our visitor which compelled our respect. But here are the 
regulars:  so the auxiliary forces may beat a retreat. These pretended journeys 
to France were rather cumbrous. Having an English job to do, they took into 
partnership, as any foreign criminal could do, this great consultant in crime. 
Others, and among them McMurdo, broke away into side streets, and so by devious 
paths to their own homes. Yet all order had not been lost amongst them, for 
some hundreds of the better armed stood together in a silent group, leaning 
upon their rude weapons and looking up at the fire, which had spread so rapidly 
as to involve one whole side of the castle. It has been kept carefully in a 
pocket-book; for the one side is as clean as the other. " 

"But I understand that all the other clothes were found in the room. We took 
Toby round to each in turn, but, though he sniffed earnestly, he made no sign. 
We ran and ran until we were completely blown, but the space between us grew 
ever wider. These alarms, and the desperate need for secrecy, argue that the 
matter is one of life or death. These were to be given to the Indian, and he 
was promised twice as much if he returned with the ropes. He instanced a snake, 
the cast skin of which, deep purple in color, was fifty-one feet in length, and 
mentioned a white creature, supposed to be mammalian, which gave forth 
well-marked phosphorescence in the darkness; also a large black moth, the bite 
of which was supposed by the Indians to be highly poisonous. He did not wish to 
put his head in a halter. " 

"This is a most extraordinary thing," said the inspector, "I could swear that 
these marks were not here yesterday evening. You are a man whose veracity is 
upon trial, and this committee is here to try it. I should have thought that 
only a sub-human intelligence could have failed to grasp the point, but if it 
really needs amplification I shall consent to see you at the hour named, though 
visits and visitors of every sort are exceeding distasteful to me. " 

Lord John looked guilty. "This is not a footmark," said I. The murderer has 
written it with his or her own blood. To-day I was not alarmed, but I was 
filled with curiosity, and I determined to find out who he was and what he 
wanted. This was found. I simply could not slink back with nothing done. " 

"Yes, sir, there must have been some very strange people with some very strange 
ways in this house. "What impression has my evidence made upon you?" The 
question might as well have been spoken. Perhaps we shall come upon some other 
indications as we proceed. " 

"I am entirely at your service," said Sherlock Holmes, ringing the bell. We 
cannot let him perish at our very gates. The dull blur in front of us resolved 
itself now clearly enough into the dainty Aurora. 

Of the riders one was young, graceful, and fair, clad in plain doublet and 
hosen of blue Brussels cloth, which served to show his active and well-knit 
figure. " 

And my words were true, for shortly after eight a hansom dashed up to the door 
and our friend got out of it. " 

"It is just these very simple things which are extremely liable to be 
overlooked. 

Sherlock Holmes gave a sigh of relief, and relaxed into a smile. 

"BALLARAT. It was only a glimpse; but I have a quick eye for these things, and 
I never doubted who it was. " 

"Why should you go further in it?  What have you to gain from it?" 

"What, indeed?  It is art for art's sake, Watson. We heard the hound on the 
moor, so I can swear that it is not all empty superstition. He was next Sidney 
Johnson in the office. His room was on the ground-floor, and he could get out 
when he liked. On the other hand, his payments were princely. It was a delicate 
point, and it widened the field of my inquiry. You will excuse me, Musgrave, if 
I say that your butler appears to me to have been a very clever man, and to 
have had a clearer insight than ten generations of his masters. 

"Well, if you couldn't you couldn't. I am inclined to agree with you, Roxton, 
that this one is defective. " 

Challenger shrugged his shoulders. "It is one now. Toller knows more about this 
matter than anyone else. " 

"Yes, sir, I do, and I am ready enough to tell what I know. Saints are they, if 
in this age any may merit so high a name. " 

"I count them not a fly," cried Hordle John; "for who is the better for all 
their whipping and yowling? They are like other friars, I trow, when all is 
done. " 

"The probability lies in that direction. 

"What, then?" 

"It is fear, Mr. It was no uncommon thing for him to be away for days and 
nights on end when he was hot upon a scent, so that his lateness caused me no 
surprise. 

"'Come! come!' she cried breathlessly. 

"It is I, McMurdo. On the other hand, we brought to the surface an object of a 
most unexpected kind. But it was another thing when he came out into the world. 
" 

"I am all attention," said Sherlock Holmes. " 

McGinty laughed. " 

"Acolyte?" 

"Yes, father. Let me see if I can make it clearer. " That was enough to decide 
me. "I trust that I am a better bowman than a minstrel," said he. " 

"Words, words!" shouted the other furiously. " 

"But why should he come. " 

"I was sleepy before you came. I could distinctly see the isolated, 
tree-crowned pinnacle of rock which was detached from the crag. But how are you 
affected?" 

"I will tell you it all. " 

Scanlan descended, and McMurdo was left once again to his thoughts. I had 
brought a pack of cards in my pocket, and I thought that, as we were a partie 
carrée, you might have your rubber after all. ' 

"The Coroner: Did your father make any statement to you before he died? 

"Witness: He mumbled a few words, but I could only catch some allusion to a 
rat. 

"'And British Broken Hills?' 

"'Seven to seven-and-six. 

"Then sure I have no need to tell thee mine," said the other. On that to the 
right sat a very tall and well formed man with red hair, a livid face, and a 
cold blue eye, which had in it something peculiarly sinister and menacing. 

There was yet another individual whose residence under that roof was, it is 
true, only an intermittent one, but whose presence at the time of the strange 
happenings which will now be narrated brought his name prominently before the 
public. She was slighted like and had no say in anything, but it never really 
became bad for her until after she met Mr. When I cried out that it was a false 
alarm, she replaced it, glanced at the rocket, rushed from the room, and I have 
not seen her since. "Under laws which in their inception are beyond and above 
us, it became peopled. Why may the same process not happen again?" 

"My dear Challenger, you can't mean that?" 

"I am not in the habit, Professor Summerlee, of saying things which I do not 
mean. Finding all remonstrance useless, the three comrades hastened on their 
way, leaving these strange travellers to their dreary task. 

Months afterwards a curious newspaper cutting reached us from Buda-Pesth. "The 
firms have been generous of late. You see, Watson, our little deductions have 
suddenly assumed a much more important and less innocent aspect. Now, Miss 
Violet, what has happened to you, near Farnham, on the borders of Surrey?" 

The young lady, with great clearness and composure, made the following curious 
statement: 

"My father is dead, Mr. " 

The man sat huddled up in his chair, with his head sunk upon his breast, like 
one who is utterly crushed. " 

"On the contrary, I have noticed that when he is off the trail he generally 
says so. " 

"But have sworn no vow of constancy or chastity?" 

"No, father. "But what I'm askin' myself is whether it's really over or whether 
it's only half-time. " 

My experience of camp life in Afghanistan had at least had the effect of making 
me a prompt and ready traveller. " 

"If I come down to you, Silas, I may lay my belt across your shoulders," 
Aylward answered, amid a general shout of laughter. " 

"How do you know?" 

"I saw their traces. " 

"Splendid!" 

"We have an inspector who makes a specialty of Saffron Hill and the Italian 
Quarter. There was this distant light to illuminate the gloom of the immediate 
future. '  There was the ring of truth in what he said, and I knew that if I 
raised my voice I was a dead man. I saw that he was too hardened for any words 
of mine to influence him. If I backed down I knew well what would come to me. 
Mortimer for opening a grave without the consent of the next of kin because he 
dug up the Neolithic skull in the barrow on Long Down. They had called upon us 
that very afternoon, so that it was natural that the subject should come up for 
discussion. The mark was put by Barker's bloodstained slipper upon the 
windowsill to suggest how the fugitive got away. But I am a caballero of 
Aragon, Don Sancho Penelosa, and, though I be no king, I am yet ready to pay a 
fitting price for my ransom. I did not even know that it was a knife which I 
held in my hand, for in my despair I snatched anything from the table and 
struck at him to make him let me go. I suppose that it is no use my attempting 
to conceal that our marriage has not been a happy one. 

"We now come to that portion of his life which has proved to be of such intense 
interest to us. 

"That which my son himself indicated--that of the cupboard of the lumber-room. 
Then, of course, she might give us very important information, but I was not 
sanguine that she would. 

"What do you make of that, Watson?" Holmes whispered. " 

"You were always a cur and a traitor, Mark Shaw," cried Aylward. " 

"A model truly! Wilt make a squire of squires. So you actually thought that I 
was the criminal?" 

"I did not know who you were, but I was determined to find out. 

And yet it was all over in a flash, and there was no sequel to it, save in our 
own convictions. 

A roar of delight from his audience, with stamping of feet and beating of 
blackjacks against the ground, showed how thoroughly the song was to their 
taste, while John modestly retired into a quart pot, which he drained in four 
giant gulps. " 

"Nay, Aylward, I will have a care. Very much so. It is unlikely that a 
youngster like Adair would at once make a hideous scandal by exposing a well 
known man so much older than himself. Sometimes he visited Paris for three 
months on end, but Mitton was left in charge of the Godolphin Street house. He 
was above and beyond us. I should have put him at about thirty, though he was 
really some years older. " 

There was no need, however, for him to move, for the twain came swiftly towards 
them until they were within a spear's length, when the man with the cross sat 
himself down sullenly upon a tussock of grass by the wayside, while the other 
stood beside him with his great cudgel still hanging over his head. The 
furniture was scattered about in every direction, with dismantled shelves and 
open drawers, as if the lady had hurriedly ransacked them before her flight. It 
may have been taken from him. " 

"What is it, then?" 

"Well, you know, after a crime of this sort we are very careful to keep things 
in their position. That is where old Mrs. 

"Have you found anything out yet?" she asked. "Tell him," said he, "that I 
shall have ten cows and a bull too, if it be but a little one. " 

"Had it a tail?" 

"No. "Here is the letter to which I refer. Suddenly, however, a flash of 
intelligence had come over his sodden features, and he rose and staggered for 
the door. From this he took a paper, and returning to his seat he flattened it 
out beside the taper on the edge of the table, and began to study it with 
minute attention. The traffic is all held up. It was a relief to me when at 
last, after a light dinner, we set out upon our expedition. 

"We earned a living at this time by my exhibiting poor Tonga at fairs and other 
such places as the black cannibal. My wife had always been a woman of a frank, 
open nature, and it gave me a chill to see her slinking into her own room, and 
crying out and wincing when her own husband spoke to her. That any civilized 
human being in this nineteenth century should not be aware that the earth 
travelled round the sun appeared to be to me such an extraordinary fact that I 
could hardly realize it. You can think that I looked out when I came to 
Charlington Heath, and there, sure enough, was the man, exactly as he had been 
the two weeks before. " 

"Oh, Jack, it would be the saving of you!" 

"I'm an honest man in some things, Ettie. I will look after the proofs. 

"Put it down!  Down, this instant, Watson--this instant, I say!" His head sank 
back upon the pillow and he gave a deep sigh of relief as I replaced the box 
upon the mantelpiece. 

"Fear not for water," cried a third. 

"Possibly not, my good Watson. "Two have been cut by a not very sharp knife, 
and two have had the ends bitten off by a set of excellent teeth. "I know not 
why the young shoots should be plucked, and an old weed left standing, yet 
certes there must be some good reason, since God hath so planned it. 

"Sir Charles had the reputation of being rich, but we did not know how very 
rich he was until we came to examine his securities. A dapper little man, with 
a quick, alert manner and a waxed moustache, had just descended from a high 
dog-cart. My father read it, clapped both his hands to his head, and began 
running round the room in little circles like a man who has been driven out of 
his senses. I shall look forward to seeing you again this afternoon. We had run 
two miles, I suppose, before Holmes at last halted and listened intently. I 
should like now to have a few words with the nurse, Theresa. Lestrade. " 

"How on earth--" 

"My dear fellow, I know you well. "I did but wish to learn the feel of them, 
since I am like to have such trinkets hung to my own girdle for some years to 
come. I believe that this man is indeed a leader whom we may follow. " 

"That is certainly good evidence," said Summerlee. " 

"Then that will simplify matters. " 

"War! war!" cried the old Italian. " 

"Might I ask from whom?" 

A shadow passed over the gaunt face of the explorer. Douglas went round the 
house every night the last thing before he turned in to see that the lights 
were right. Mrs. Challenger, a small, dainty, smiling figure, stood in the open 
doorway to welcome us. "There's that song of yours, George, 'Ring out the old, 
ring in the new. ' It was prophetic. ' 

"'And you can come up to-morrow evening, at seven, and let me know how you are 
getting on. 'This quite fits in with all that I had heard. ' 

"I was touched by this filial anxiety. 

"Of course after that there was nothing more to be done. At last our 
destination lay in full sight of us. It was impossible to mistake the scene of 
the young lady's adventure, for the road runs between the open heath on one 
side and an old yew hedge upon the other, surrounding a park which is studded 
with magnificent trees. Nearly a hundred thousand pounds' worth of American 
railway bonds, with a large amount of scrip in mines and other companies, was 
discovered in the bag. This is one of the few which partially escaped. " 

He handed over a sheet torn from a note-book. Look at the great trench in the 
opposite hill. There's a sixty-ounce brain inside it--a big engine, running 
smooth, and turning out clean work. You speak to your mate upon the left 
to-night, and see if he is to be trusted. " 

It was with a sinking heart that I reentered Holmes's bedroom. " 

"It is extraordinary how credulous the peasants are about here! Any number of 
them are ready to swear that they have seen such a creature upon the moor. " 

"Then you'll get your job, I guess. They evidently failed to appreciate the 
fact, which I had begun to realize, that Sherlock Holmes' smallest actions were 
all directed towards some definite and practical end. 

"For two days after my arrival at the Copper Beeches my life was very quiet; on 
the third, Mrs. " 

"A penitentiary job?" 

"And the rest. " 

"And you answered me?" 

"That there were not, sire. "By Gar! a man might as well live in Russia as in 
Vermissa while folk like you are running the police. James of Compostella! but 
these burghers would bear some taxing. " 

The wrack had thickened to seaward, and the coast was but a blurred line. I 
rose and, standing behind Holmes, studied it over his shoulder. 

"Just this, mister, that I should advise you to be careful in choosing your 
friends. " 

"Hum! It may prove the simplest matter in the world, but all the same at first 
glance this is just a little curious, is it not? A gang of burglars acting in 
the country might be expected to vary the scene of their operations, and not to 
crack two cribs in the same district within a few days. "I am a poor man," said 
he, as he patted it affectionately, and thrust it into the depths of his inner 
pocket. But while you wait, you might tell me what you can. "Give me the 
water!" he gasped. 

"You're precious near your end, my friend, but I don't want you to go till I 
have had a word with you. This is straight. Over the fireplace was a 
magnificent trophy of weapons, one of which had been used on that tragic night. 
There was no furniture, save a single long dresser covered with coarse 
crockery, and a number of wooden benches and trestles, the legs of which sank 
deeply into the soft clay floor, while the only light, save that of the fire, 
was furnished by three torches stuck in sockets on the wall, which flickered 
and crackled, giving forth a strong resinous odor. It corresponds with the 
injuries. It must be in her own house. The trees and wayside hedges were just 
throwing out their first green shoots, and the air was full of the pleasant 
smell of the moist earth. Let him lie; we can't do him any good, but we may 
save her from the worst fate that can befall a woman. But, holy Mother! I had 
forgot the pasty, and it will be as scorched as Judas Iscariot! Come, Nigel, 
lest the foul fiend get the better of me again. My strength had been rather 
tried of late. The smarting of it recalled in an instant all the particulars of 
my night's adventure, and I sprang to my feet with the feeling that I might 
hardly yet be safe from my pursuers. 

"I can well remember driving up to his house in the evening some three weeks 
before the fatal event. 

It was not a cheering prospect. It was unfortunately lost with so much else in 
the same boat accident which ruined my photographs. I have no wish to commit 
you to anything without your having it all laid before you. " 

"Well, well, we all get a bit prosy sometimes," said Lord John. Then I do not 
think that I need to detain you longer. " 

Lady Brackenstall was no ordinary person. I had said nothing to my wife until I 
missed the paper this morning. He would hardly reply to my questions, and 
busied himself all evening in an abstruse chemical analysis which involved much 
heating of retorts and distilling of vapors, ending at last in a smell which 
fairly drove me out of the apartment. He knew that his own game was up, and was 
only anxious to revenge himself upon me. But I did--some little distance off, 
but fresh and clear. You can't pick or choose. The whole proceeding is 
absolutely illegal and outrageous. Turning his back upon us he laid down his 
burden, and the next instant there was the sound of a sharp tap, followed by a 
clatter and rattle. 

"I've had enough of you and your geese," he shouted. 

"Yes. Blessington. He spoke of some burglary which, he said, had been committed 
in the West End, and he appeared, I remember, to be quite unnecessarily excited 
about it, declaring that a day should not pass before we should add stronger 
bolts to our windows and doors. 

His intention had been to be absent a year at the most, but a combination of 
unforeseen circumstances prevented his leaving the mines for nearly five. There 
was, therefore, as can be imagined, some little social friction when the young 
couple (for they were still young) found themselves in their new surroundings. 
So alarming did the state of my finances become, that I soon realized that I 
must either leave the metropolis and rusticate somewhere in the country, or 
that I must make a complete alteration in my style of living. " 

"Excellent! Tell me where you picked him up and all that occurred. Then with a 
light spring he came on to the barrel, and from there to the earth. "  I had a 
last impression of red cheeks, blue rippling beard, and intolerant eyes, as he 
waved me out of the room. 

"Now, off you go, and come back with a better report next time. " 

"Throw down your hilt, Edricson," cried Norbury. 

"Well, we carried him in, Abdullah, Akbar, and I. "Frank here and I met in '84, 
in McQuire's camp, near the Rockies, where pa was working a claim. We were 
engaged to each other, Frank and I; but then one day father struck a rich 
pocket and made a pile, while poor Frank here had a claim that petered out and 
came to nothing. It was a wild and desolate place, where the moon glimmered 
upon a wide expanse of marsh-land, with pools of stagnant water and beds of 
decaying vegetation. " 

"But it has twice been burgled. 

"The county police ought to make something of that," said he; "why, it is 
surely obvious that--" 

But I held up a warning finger. " 

"You will excuse this mask," continued our strange visitor. That is actually 
sketched from the life. " 

"Your case is not complete, then?" I asked. He stretched out his long arm to 
turn the lamp away from himself and towards the vacant chair upon which a 
newcomer must sit. He would put it through this ventilator at the hour that he 
thought best, with the certainty that it would crawl down the rope and land on 
the bed. I happen to know that he paid seven hundred pounds to a footman for a 
note two lines in length, and that the ruin of a noble family was the result. " 

"Ah, you look on these things from another standpoint. We can see from the 
window all that this place can teach us. Paul!" answered Sir Nigel, "I can by 
no means understand what hath befallen us, save that I have been woken up by 
your battle-cry, and, rushing forth, found myself in the midst of this small 
bickering. I doubt not that he has brought these cavaliers upon us. " 

"Why?" 

"Because you will find me a dangerous companion now. Well, Sir Henry, I am of 
one mind with you as to the advisability of your going down to Devonshire 
without delay. Good-night. " 

"Now for Mr. They know all they see at Godolphin Street. " 

"What explanation did she give of having answered the bell when Mr. Now, Mr. 
But I'll have them, Watson, I'll have them!" His eyes kindled and a slight 
flush sprang into his thin cheeks. Things are quiet, so friend Challenger sees 
a chance to set the public talking about him. In some ways they have within the 
last forty-eight hours become much clearer and in some ways they have become 
more complicated. Then will come the greatest criminal trial of the century, 
the clearing up of over forty mysteries, and the rope for all of them; but if 
we move at all prematurely, you understand, they may slip out of our hands even 
at the last moment. 

"Now, Watson, the fair sex is your department," said Holmes, with a smile, when 
the dwindling frou-frou of skirts had ended in the slam of the front door. Any 
one of the larger carnivorous dinosaurs would meet the case. But there is 
nothing to eat unless he were to catch and slaughter one of the moor sheep. All 
are asleep in the house. Against the bailey-walls were rows of frail wooden 
houses and leaning sheds, which gave shelter to the archers and men-at-arms who 
formed the garrison. Ford and Edricson gazed around them in amazement, for 
never had they seen such magnificent works of art. 

"You like them then," the lame artist cried, in answer to the look of pleasure 
and of surprise in their faces. "That tries a man's nerves more than work, and 
more even than pleasure. The case has, in some respects, been not entirely 
devoid of interest. Look how the water is still oozing into that deeper print!  
By Jove!  See, here is the mark of a little one!" 

Sure enough, smaller tracks of the same general form were running parallel to 
the large ones. " 

McGinty glanced his eyes over the account of the shooting of one Jonas Pinto, 
in the Lake Saloon, Market Street, Chicago, in the New Year week of 1874. Then 
as the air became perceptibly better, but our own symptoms more acute, he 
closed it once again. Having done this, he drew up the windows on each side, 
and I found to my astonishment that they were covered with paper so as to 
prevent my seeing through them. You may walk to the cab, and I shall be with 
you presently. Mortimer was reading his legend. " 

"But Dr. There are indications that the man was crazed with fear before ever he 
began to run. 

Every minute that white woolly plain which covered one-half of the moor was 
drifting closer and closer to the house. I hope you'll prove worth it. " 

"Had he ever spoken of Swandam Lane?" 

"Never. 

"It depends upon the breed of men quite as much as on the county," said Dr. 
Often in my dreams have I thought that I might live to be a war correspondent. 
It was as if the devil was in him, for he sprang here and sprang there, now 
thrusting and now cutting, catching blows on his shield, turning them with his 
blade, stooping under the swing of an axe, springing over the sweep of a sword, 
so swift and so erratic that the man who braced himself for a blow at him might 
find him six paces off ere he could bring it down. Shall be glad if you will 
come with me. . 
