. " 

"How do you, a stranger, know my name?" 

"I know many things. Thanks. You having as much trouble as we are?" 

"More," the engineer said, glumly. You and Jim both, then, will know what 
you're doing, while Belle and I are trying to play ours by ear. " 

"All x. " 

"And I on your left!" Belle's thought drove in as he had never before felt it 
driven. " The minion went out, and Roger continued, emotionlessly: 

"Collectively, the other passengers may be worth a million or so, but it would 
not be worthwhile to waste time upon them. I'm hungry as a wolf, too, now that 
I have time to think of it. You want me, I take it, to join the first team?" 

"That's right. " 

"All these things shall be done. 

"It is not my business to know; only to tell. " Crowninshield, phones at his 
ears and microphone at his lips, was staring intently into his own plate. 

"That was an eminently convincing demonstration, Brownie, but don't do it too 
often. "How come, do you suppose?" 

"I can, too. I think so, but of course anything might happen. " 



After breakfast next morning, the staff met in the lounge. Even though it 
failed, one man saw the possibilities. The horny, wrinkled, drought-resisting 
Martian, whom we all know and rather like, is a hideous being indeed. " 

"Okay. "They were green, as were men. " 

"They're of the same order as Roeser's--that is, they're sub-electronic waves 
of the fourth order--but they're very much shorter, and hence more penetrating. 
"After all, he did not _say_ that he ever passed this or any other test. On the 
way back across the foothills Stevens shot another hexaped, and upon the 
plateau above the river Nadia bagged several birds and small animals, but it 
was not until they were actually in their own little canyon that their rapid 
pace slackened and their vigilance relaxed. The first thing they'll do is beef 
up their planetary defenses to match. " 

The likeness of the alien being became clear upon the alien screen; visible 
from the waist up. "However," they went on carefully, "it must not be and is 
not our intent to sway you in any action or decision. While not all of you 
four, perhaps, are as yet fully mature, not one of you should be subjected to 
any additional exterior stresses. " 

"Not ours. "I could do handstands and pinwheels with joy. . . that is, unless 
that group of--of espers gets their ship off the ground. . . . . little 
sweetheart," he whispered, and went back to Bradley's side. 

In due time the captain recovered consciousness, and slept. "Let's go see what 
number four generator looks like. " 

"By all means. Not deliberately were Kromodeor's thoughts hidden; he was 
constitutionally unable to interest himself in the thoughts or things of any 
alien intelligence. My thought will go to every person on this, your world. You 
will now agree on this recording and before these witnesses, to obey my orders 
unquestioningly or I will now unload all Bureau of Science personnel and 
equipment onto this planet and send you and the _Perseus_ back to Terra with 
the doubly-sealed record of this episode posted to the Advisory Board. You two 
had better get some rest. " 

"These things will consume some time. He pressed it warmly. " 

"That expresses my thoughts exactly. " 

"It is, and you don't. Down and down the projection plunged, through mile after 
mile of reeking, steaming fog, impenetrable to earthly eyes. He was glum 
enough, and bitter, at first: but he found much to do. 

"We have, as you know, put our best operatives to work on the inter-planetary 
lines," he said finally, half sullenly. It rushed in as ordinary air. " 

"No, it isn't. I've heard of her. " Costigan was thinking fast. She's the 
contactor, the spreader of the good old oil, the shining example of purity and 
sweetness and light--in short, the Greaser of the Ways. Would you mind?" 

"Glad to, Mr. " 

Samms came aboard; three Lensmen studied the chart. None of us really enjoys 
polishing brass or washing dishes--and besides, he's one star cook and an A-1 
housekeeper. When Tedric's riders charged, at the crack of the indicated dawn, 
they did not tear through a motley horde of half-armored, half-trained 
barbarians. Listen carefully now, and remember--it is very possible that the 
next craft you attack in such utterly idiotic fashion will, without any more 
warning than you gave, blow this whole planet into a ball of incandescent gas. 
For the first, preliminary thinning down, you take. Do you think that will be 
enough? Think of how far we may have to go, what we may possibly get into, and 
what it will mean to Dottie if we fail for lack of power. " This from the 
stranger. "I get you, to nineteen decimals. That seals your doom, boss, unless. 
That they intended to hunt down and kill every Lensman, and to subvert the 
Galactic Council to their own ends. " 

"We have equipment and tools designed specifically for getting information out 
of such as you. 

"Doctor Chambers," Brookings began, showing him the bottle, "I have here a 
solution which in some way is capable of liberating the intra-atomic energy of 
matter, about which I asked you yesterday. "I see you're surprised at my 
knowing your language. No data. The outlaws had each been given a chance to 
surrender, and each had refused it. As soon as this is done, the highly-charged 
particles--or whatever they are--thus formed are repelled by the terrific 
stationary force maintained in the projector backing the converter. Thanks to 
you, we are not even crippled, though our capital is destroyed and the lives of 
some unfortunates, who could not reach the pits in time, have probably been 
lost. Good night. " 

"Good night, Brownie. "Don't you see, you big, dense, wonderful man, that it is 
the only thing to do? We need each other, or at least, I need you, so much now. 
" 

"Spill the news, Reddy," he commanded, as his arm tightened about her. "No 
harm--he's doing this strictly on his own--if Morgan had had any idea he'd've 
killed him first. " Once more a vessel had issued from the jealously secret 
city of Zbardk without betraying its existence to the hated and feared hexans. 
"Okay, I'll let you get away with that--at least for a while. We'll cover you. 
. . . there may be later, perhaps. . m. . " 

"Dead? Can't you raise _anybody_?" 

"Not yet. I don't see how anybody could help but be. Well, let's go places and 
do things! You'd better put on a suit, too, so you can stand in the air-lock 
and handle the line. " 

They donned the heavily insulated, heated suits, and Stevens snapped the 
locking plugs of the drag line into their sockets upon the helmets. "Unanimous 
vote for the first time. " 

"Who wouldn't?" Sandra asked. The fault is of course mine, in not being able to 
attune my mind fully to yours. No one of them would put his Lens on Jill, since 
she did not have one. Everything is ready. " 

"What _are_ you talking about?" demanded Nadia. They have been kicking around 
for years, he says--so small that nobody wanted them. Nor shall Sarlon pay 
tribute merely; Sarlon must and shall become a province of my kingdom!" 

So argument raged, until Phagon got up onto his royal high horse and declared 
it his royal will that the thing was to be done his way and no other. 

"Guess that's all I'll need, Chief," Cloud remarked, finally. "Have you 
detected any indications that there may be some connection between either 
Ossmen or Morgan and any officer or executive of Interstellar Spaceways?" 

"_Spaceways!_ Isaacson?" Jill caught her breath. None," the Port Admiral 
replied, as formally, then went on via Lens: "No comment or criticism to make, 
Alex. You fellows have done a job so far and you'll keep on doing one. And whom 
am I to love a girl like you? A homeless spacehound who hasn't been on any 
planet three weeks in three years. Nope, it's a tough order to fill. 

"What can we do about it?" asked Quince. "We'll bring ourselves, and we'll 
hurry. " 

"Have you got all those rays and things fixed up?" 

"Not as many as I'd like to have. He will be a stumbling-block. 

"Do you see it yet?" asked Dorothy with concern. I think we'd better beat it," 
remarked Seaton presently, wiping drops of perspiration from his forehead. 
That's exactly what he was trying to do. Then they looked the ship over rather 
casually, as though they didn't see anything they were interested in; crippled 
the motors; and went away. It's a mess, but it's ours--or was, at last 
accounts--so the worst of it will be over. You would never, willingly, pair 
with a woman you really loved. . . . yes, but. She got a super-deluxe fur 
coat--Martian tekkyl, no less--out of that Mackenzie River power deal. . . . . 
" 

"I'll tell the cockeyed world you won't!" Hilton broke in. "I just can't get 
used to having no night, and. I will observe with keen interest. . " He had 
started to say "because you're the best friend I've got in the System," but he 
did not. Would you be willing to sell us plans, or lease us ships. One more 
thing. . . . sathura. The brain of the Larry is very, very tough. " 



"Look here, Fred. My thought, however, is that the principal cause of the 
trouble is the coming into being of this multiplicity of political parties, 
particularly those composed principally of crackpots and extremists. " 



For a moment the group was stunned. "We have just. Two out of seven chances, 
and we drew one of them. Never take any chances. This female youth erroneously 
called Thomas, somewhat careless in computing the elements of her trajectory, 
will jostle slightly the barber's elbow with her tail; thus causing him to make 
a slight incision, approximately three millimeters long, parallel to and just 
above your left cheek-bone. Reaching into his mouth, he pulled out a flaming 
match, at which Nalboon started violently. While all the natives watched in 
amazement, Seaton lighted the cigarette, and after half consuming it in two 
long inhalations, he apparently swallowed the remainder, only to bring it to 
light again. In consequence, Titan's power has been cut to a minimum, since 
maintaining our beam at that great distance required a large fraction of the 
output of the other plant. Nevian submarines and airships were beginning to 
arrive upon the scene, and were beaming the building viciously in an attempt to 
entrap or to crush the foreigners in its ruins Costigan managed finally to 
blast his way out, but the Nevians had had time to assemble in force and he was 
met by a concentrated storm of beams and of metal from every inimical weapon 
within range. Worm, Submarine, and Freedom                        159 

XIII. The Hill                                           165 

XIV. The surviving Arpalone fighters and other small craft were making no 
attempt to land, anywhere on the world's surface. How do you figure we can do 
any better?" 

"Because we'll _use_ our brains!" she snapped. We bought up all the platinum 
wastes we could get, and reworked all the metallic platinum and allied metals 
we could buy in the open market, and got less than a gram of X out of the whole 
lot. The conditions I mentioned would be difficult at the moment, since so few 
of us are here and it is manifest that few if any of our people will believe 
that such people as you Galaxians really exist. I know. " 

"Pretty slow?" Crane smiled. However, there is no doubt that physically you are 
perfectly compatible with our humanity. Therefore it looks as though our best 
bet is to hide now, and try to sneak away on them after a while--direct methods 
won't work. If there's a Lensman there, I'll get him. " 

"How well you understand him," Dorothy said, after a pause. "His big mistake 
was in that second body check. We'll disarm them, too. They fired up their 
hidden planes and flew back behind the Curtain. 

Finally, the last dummy instrument was installed in the worthless space-car, 
which the friends referred to between themselves as "The Cripple," a name which 
Seaton soon changed to "Old Crip. Distinctly feline as to heads, teeth, and 
claws. While they did not at all closely resemble flying saber-toothed tigers, 
that was the first impression that leaped into Garlock's mind. These 
instruments are wonders, Dick--vastly ahead of anything I have ever seen. As 
the hexan planes of force flashed out, the dull green metal walls broke into a 
sparkling green radiance, against which the Titanic bolts spent themselves in 
vain. They would now systematically scour the fortress, to wipe out any hexans 
that might still be in hiding; to discover and destroy any possible traps or 
infernal machines which the enemy might have planted for their undoing. Thus, 
about two and one-half of your years ago, a starship of that race sent down a 
sensing element--unmanned, of course--to check your state of development. . " 

"The hell it won't. We won't be here long enough to make it worth while. We've 
got more of it on hand now than we're apt to need for a long time, so have a 
hunk and get busy," and he easily carried one of the lumps out of his cabin and 
tossed it upon the dock, from whence it required two of Kondal's strongest men 
to lift it. While they unload and load you up, we'll install the zone 
apparatus, put a compass on you, put one of yours on us, and then you can hop 
back up here where you're comfortable. Having smoked it, he apparently 
swallowed the butt, with evident relish. He had not given himself 
away--practically everybody screened their inside coat pockets and hip pockets, 
and the cat-whisker lead from Lens to leg simply could not be seen--but for all 
the good they were doing him his ultra-instruments might just as well have been 
back on Tellus. 

Number Ten was another queer--the Tellurians were found incompatible. In 
leaving this holy place all will file between me and the shrine. If we had two 
years, I know that we could lick them cold; and by stepping on the gas I 
believe we can get the dope in less than the six months we have to work in. " 

"I've a better scheme than that," interrupted DuQuesne. " 

"If these deductions are anywhere nearly correct, they are terrible neighbors. 
"Mr. Clancy! Mr. Edwards!" 

"To hell with Clancy, and Edwards, too," Jones barked. "Gimme the Chief 
Engineer and the Head Surveyor, and gimme 'em _fast_. " 

"Clancy speaking, Station Twelve. "To that end you will go now into the 
hospital room and see the bandaging going on. Each knows what he can do best 
and does it as a matter of course. On fifteen of these worlds the Primes are 
not yet adult. That's my high bid; that's as high as we can possibly go. . . " 

"As you were, ace!" Stevens interrupted, embarrassed. My guess would be, 
though, that you could. It's probably in the safest safe-deposit vault in the 
country. Ergo, he is too far away to reach--and with his weight, I could find 
him anywhere up to about one and a half light-years. If he wants to go that far 
away from home, where is his logical destination? It can't be anywhere but 
Osnome, since that is the only place we stopped at for any length of time--the 
only place where he could have learned anything. Didn't you notice that while 
we were eating they talked together for at least fifteen minutes about her 
father's invention and the way they stole the plans and one thing and another? 
I don't believe he has talked that much to any girl except me the last five 
years--and he wouldn't talk to me until he knew that I couldn't see any man 
except you. 

No one except Tula had felt a thing. . . . . . I certainly don't do it 
intentionally. I never could see how mass could be a function of velocity, and 
now I am convinced that it is not. " 

"Good. 

"I'm afraid not. How could a Two--a high Two, at that--be working as an usher? 
And with her guard down clear to the floor? He probed--and saw. Some heroin, 
and quite a bit of Martian ladolian. I can walk without falling down. " 



He concentrated--read a few feet of top-secret braided wire--and came back to 
consciousness in the sickbay of the _Perseus_, with two doctors working on him; 
Hastings, the top Navy medico, and Flandres, the surgeon. They're the type. 
They have one man in front and one in back, a couple of detectaphones in my 
rooms here, and have coupled onto this telephone. However, we'll know pretty 
quick, and then we'll take steps. Therefore it is quite a little more massive 
than has been. Inertialess now, pausing briefly from time to time to enable the 
crew to accustom themselves to the new sensations, Triplanetary's super-ship 
pursued the invader; hurtling through the void with a velocity unthinkable. 

"He was easier to take than I thought he would be," Cleveland grunted, staring 
into the plate. You see, he tried to prove to the others that he was right, and 
nothing happened. " 

"Very well, sir. 

"That long-dead unit, so inexplicably reactivated, is approaching the fuel 
world. Seaton strode up and down the room, puffing great volumes of smoke from 
his hot and reeking briar, suggesting methods and ideas, his keen mind finding 
the way over, around, or through the apparently insuperable obstacles which 
beset their path. 

"What can you have to say to me?" the general demanded, disregarding the 
invitation. "It'd look still better if I peeled down to the altogether. . " 

"Captured savages?" interrupted Dorothy. 

"Well, it would have smelled slightly cheesy, I thought. You know the edge of 
the galaxy closest to Tellus, where that big rift cuts in?" 

"Yes. Those cops were funny. By now there should be a hole a mile deep where 
the Hill had been. They do not attach nearly as much importance to morale as we 
do; by the very nature of their regime they can't. " He had no idea where the 
Engineers came from; they didn't say. Stretch out here, like that--you can't 
rest folded up like an accordion--and I'll lie down diagonally across the room. 
There's just room for me that way. Now that we are all comfortable and waiting, 
I will introduce my party to yours. " 

Bergenholm paused. "You talk like a fool! You can't get anything on either of 
them. I've hardly dared really to believe it until this very minute. "We have 
abundance of power for all of your projector officers. " 

Dunark stepped to the controls and the elevator shot upward, stopping at a 
landing several stories below the top of the dock. It'd be interesting. Like on 
Eridan, where their ops could wear anything they could lift, but we had to go 
naked. " He flinched mentally as he recalled his encounter with Hazel the 
Hell-cat, and Northrop flinched with him. In sheer astonishment old Five-Jets 
obeyed. To their right the river, the gorge, and the strip of meadow extended 
for a mile or more, then curved away and were lost to sight. Driving units were 
installed--drives of such immensity of power as to test to the full the highest 
engineering skills of the Galaxy. Mountains of fuel-concentrate filled vast 
reservoirs of concrete. Each was connected to a drive by fifty-inch high-speed 
conveyors. More! Each spectator knew that one of those men would die that 
afternoon. None wanted, or would permit them both to live. Still you've got the 
nerve to think that you can get them with ordinary gunmen! I've drawn you 
diagrams and shown you figures--I've told you in great detail and in 
one-syllable words exactly what we're up against. Now I tell you again that 
they've _got something_. You simply imagine that there is a point source of 
light at your point of projection: it isn't really there. A more important job 
for you is this: Any problem, to be solved, must be stated clearly; and we 
don't know even what our basic problem is. A large, thick stick. Acceleration 
was brought slowly up to normal, and the battle-scarred cruiser of the void, 
with her heavy burden of inert metal, resumed her interrupted voyage toward 
Europa; the satellite upon which the passengers and crew of the ill-fated 
_Arcturus_ had been so long immured. On she bored through the ether, detector 
screens full out and greenly scintillant Vorkulian wall-screens outlining her 
football shape in weird and ghastly light; unafraid now of any possible 
surviving space-craft of the hexans. . when there hasn't been any first 
survivor to be an       | | expert! When no one has ever gotten back to explain 
what     | | happened. . " 

"I know I'll get fired. "You can't make the Samms wench and aren't in position 
to skin her alive, so you get allergic to all her relatives. " 

"No, I told Mart. _Wilt_!" Nadia's voice dripped scorn. "Why, he di. 

"More like tanks," he disagreed, "except that they've got legs, wheels _and_ 
treads--and arms, cutters, diggers, probes and conveyors--and _look_ at the way 
those buckets dip solid rock!" 

The fantastic machine was moving very slowly along a bench or shelf that it was 
making for itself as it went along. I'd like to know what the girls have been 
doing. . . That's all right, too. However, either course will take lots of 
power, so the first thing I've got to do is to build a power plant. They'll 
report to you--facts, deductions, guesses, and recommendations--whenever you 
say the word. " 

"Yeah, but if they've got accumulator capacity enough to hold off our entire 
cosmic intake and get back to Jupiter besides, I'm a polyp! We're going to take 
that ship, fellows, and learn a lot of stuff we never dreamed of before. No 
fragment was large enough to be navigable or dangerous and each was sharply 
cut, as though sheared from its neighbor by some gigantic curved blade. 

"Here are your pellets, General Cardeen. She shuddered and shivered, tried to 
tear herself into shreds and chunks; but Phryges in his tank was unconcerned. 
He was evidently not going to play footsie with, or show any favoritism 
whatever toward, any woman aboard the ship. Then, while all of the attention of 
the Nevians and practically all of their maximum possible power output was 
being devoted to the neutralization of that last desperate thrust, the metal 
wall of the planetoid opened and the First Section shot out into space. 

Temple, giving up her attempts to near-drown her husband, rolled over and 
floated quietly beside him. "What we call Unit Eight--the heart of the drive. I 
do know, however, that we can and will use it. Before they come, let us decide 
upon the ceremony. " 

"Flapdoodle!" she snorted, inelegantly. On second thought, though, I don't 
believe that DuQuesne would be fool enough to tackle us again in the same 
way--but I'm taking no chances. Not one was really interested in the Galactic 
Service as an instrument for the good of all mankind. 

"On them it looks good," Belle tight-beamed a thought to Garlock. For whatever 
that devouring fluid touched flared into yellow flame, gave off clouds of 
lurid, strangling vapor, and disappeared. They were not the twinkling, 
scintillating beauties of the earthly sky, but minute points, so small as to 
seem dimensionless, yet of dazzling brilliance. Then they went on to say that 
they wanted the entire green system for themselves, and that in something like 
two years of our time they were going to wipe out all the present inhabitants 
of the system and take it over, as a base for further operations. From there 
on, of course, it was simple--just like a dentist making a set of china 
choppers or a metallurgist embedding a test-section. " 

"Good God!" Deston exclaimed. "Me marry a damned female Ph. D. _ 

_Author of "Skylark of Space," and "Skylark Three"_ 













Spacehounds of IPC 



_One of the most fascinating mysteries of the heavens is the comet. He watched 
him do things that Tedric of Time Track One had never done. For minutes a host 
of robots toiled mightily, then a portion of the shield bulged out and became a 
tube extending beyond the attacking layers of force; a tube from which there 
erupted a beam of violence incredible. Then, too, you realize, of course, that 
there is a bare possibility that intra-atomic energy may not be absolutely 
impossible. Then, the minds of all the other Thinkers being screened, he 
studied the whole Strett planet, foot by foot, and everything that was on it. 
Until, finally, it happened. 

There was a blast beside which the most terrific flash of lightning ever seen 
on Earth would have seemed like a firecracker. I was perfectly miserable until 
Martin called this afternoon and explained what you have been doing. Why, I 
wouldn't have missed that for _anything_!" 

When Hilton left the room he was apparently, in every respect, his usual 
self-contained self. Yowp! I'm a wild Siberian catamount, and this is my night 
to howl. Whee-ee-yerow!" 

Dorothy laughed, a gay, lilting carol. 

"Haven't I always told you he had cat blood in him, Peggy? Just like all 
tomcats, every once in a while he has to stretch his claws and yowl. You will 
listen. This warfare was ascribed to pirates. " 



There were. We will see to it. " 

"Any of you wishing to leave this vessel have my full permission to do so," 
Roger announced, disdaining any reply to the challenge of the _Boise_. But they 
won't keep me long. K. , Tug. C. Took it, and started studying organic and food 
chemistry at George Washington University. 

All personal haste was now over. They had no doubt at all as to their ability 
to do it. They stamped the ship's papers without either reading or checking 
them. The free end, under its thousands of pounds of tension, had struck the 
being upon the side of the head, and the force of the blow, only partially 
blocked by the heavy helmet, had hurled him out through the yawning gap in the 
wall and hundreds of miles out into space. 

As that irresistible bolt touched the Vorkulian wall-screen, the spot of 
contact flared instantaneously through the spectrum and into the black beyond 
the violet as that screen overloaded locally. "Roll out or roll up! Come and 
get it, before I throw it away!" 

"I must have been kind of tired," he said sheepishly, when he saw that she had 
shot a bird and had cooked breakfast for them both while he had been buried in 
oblivion. 

"Peculiar, too, isn't it?" Nadia asked, pointedly. "He's going to live, isn't 
he?" 

"Oh, yes, Phil--definitely yes," Lacy replied, briskly. You couldn't beat Dick 
and Martin in a thousand years!" 

The tension under which they had been laboring so long suddenly released, the 
two girls locked their arms around each other in a half-hysterical outburst of 
relief. " 

"Why? No use in both of us taking such a chance. Guess we'll have to take time 
to get another vessel. I'd like to drag in the pieces of that ship, too--his 
instruments and a lot of the parts could be used. Let's see what we can find 
out about them. " 

The report of Knobos and DalNalten was terse and exact. I can't find a trace of 
ultra-wave--anything below ether-level, you know--anywhere in the whole place. 
Have you any idea where?" 

"He is now in his home city, accumulating funds and manufacturing fuel with 
which to continue his pointless activities. " He told her his plan. Shortly 
thereafter the office door was wrenched open. Keller had come to Kinnison, 
accompanied by the Superintendent whom the Siberians referred to, somewhat 
contemptuously, as "Piddy. " 

"Damn your soul, Kinnison, come out here--I want to talk to you!" Keller 
roared, and doors snapped open up and down the long corridor. Such wire will do 
very nicely. With this word of warning I will get on with my report. " 

Both men looked around the great bowl. However, since Operators and Primes are 
automatically stacked like Tennick Towers, I don't suppose your recruits will 
be unduly perturbed at, or will squawk too much about, overexposure. 







VII 



Knowing that he had done everything he could to help the most important 
investigations get under way, Hilton turned his attention to secondary matters. 
" 

"What are your requirements?" the general asked. He appealed to Tedric. The bag 
was still half full of the strange gems, some of them glowing like miniature 
lamps in the dark depths, and he made no effort to appraise them. 
Simultaneously the entire midsection of the vessel exploded into light and 
disappeared; completely volatilized. 

At the same moment the woman immediately in front of Garlock stifled a scream 
and jumped backward, bumping into him and almost knocking him down. If you 
insist upon going without further preparation I will go too, no matter how 
foolish I think such a course to be. I've been scared stiff every time I 
thought of our wedding. If I don't know something about explosives I did a 
smart job of fooling Dean Montrose, back at Gosh Whatta University. Five floors 
up, straight ahead down a corridor--fourth door on right. " 

He prowled around the room. "I'm not going to get more than a meter away from 
you from now on. . . . but I CAN NOT LIE TO YOU. . but it's so damned _steady_. 
Enough so to take half the damage. " 



"You and your theories! I wish we could get some _facts_!" 

"You can call that a fact. 

A miner came running up and Jones covered his mouth-piece. Have you figured out 
a way to break it?" 

"It can't be broken. The harder they hit it and the wider they spread it, the 
better. And as for a machine, what finer one is possible than the Patrol? 
Everybody in it or connected with it will support you to the hilt--you know 
that. Watching you work has been not only a delight, but also a liberal 
education. 

"Pretty bad, but better than I thought," the captain reported. I invite you to 
come into my vessel, unarmed and alone, for a conference. A surprising 
development, truly--we have thought for many cycles of time that we were the 
only highly advanced life in this universe. It's hard to believe, but 
nevertheless it's a fact. Ergo, he is too far away to reach--and with his 
weight, I could find him anywhere up to about one and a half light-years. If he 
wants to go that far away from home, where is his logical destination? It can't 
be anywhere but Osnome, since that is the only place we stopped at for any 
length of time--the only place where he could have learned anything. . . . you 
_beast_!" Belle drove a tight-beamed thought. . It _couldn't_ have happened. It 
is equally probable that a great company--in this case the World Steel 
Corporation--is backing him, though I don't believe there is a ghost of a show 
of ever being able to prove it in law. " 

"I am not so sure of that. Fairly running across to her, he made a slight 
obeisance and in eager tones poured forth such a stream of language that she 
held up her hand to silence him. 

"Go slower, please," she said, and added a couple of words in his own tongue. 
He had lucid intervals at times, but he did not, at the time or ever, know 
surely what was real and what was fantasy. " 

"Not until after I see whether he can work or not. "He's quiet--sort of 
reserved--no passes or anything like that--it'd be funny if I finally got a 
boss that had something on the ball, wouldn't it? But you know what, Molly?" 
The red-head giggled suddenly. "He has a good skeleton, very good indeed. We 
can use him to shovel out the gunkum and clean up. So will they. There were 
four practically simultaneous detonations--silent, but terrific explosions as 
the pent-up internal energy of solid pentavalent nitrogen was instantaneously 
released--and the four insensately murderous spheres disappeared into jagged 
fragments of wreckage, flying wildly away from the centers of explosion. . . " 

"Or you could, Rod. Drawing himself over to her, he picked her up in a tight 
embrace. 

"Cheer up, Red-Top! This man's war ain't started yet!" 

"Not started? What do you mean? Haven't you and Martin just been admitting to 
each other that you can't do anything? Doesn't that mean that we are beaten?" 

"Beaten! Us? How do you get that way? Not on your sweet young life!" he 
ejaculated, and the surprise on his face was so manifest that she recovered 
instantly. "Constant negative acceleration and in a straight line. He must 
think that we have been cleared out of the ether. 

"There, that'll hold 'em for a while, I guess. I have never seen an undertaking 
of such size go forward so smoothly and with such fine co-operation. They have 
been disassembled and stored. They're utterly inhuman--I can't describe 
it--you'll have to get it for yourself. " 

"Admitted--but at the same time they are being paid in North American currency. 
"And your folks, too, of course?" she asked. So get going, daddy old dear, and 
let's do things! Steve's a Quaker and we're Presbyterians, so none of the 
chaplains will do at all. 

Landing on the daylight side, except possibly at exact noon, would be 
impossible because of the wind, nor could the ship stay landed for more than a 
couple of minutes. Were they recent arrivals from some other space-time 
continuum? Probably not--Eddorian surveys had found no trace of any such life 
in any reachable plenum. They are exactly as you left them. As Titan grew 
colder and colder they probably dug their cities deeper and ever deeper; until 
humanity came finally to realize that it must itself change completely or 
perish utterly. . Mentioning names hadn't been enough, but a personal 
appearance. . " 

"It would wreck North America as no nation has ever been wrecked; quite 
possibly beyond recovery. That's one of the things I like so much about you. " 

"What next, Dick?" 

"Now the real trouble begins. " Ynos's mind was leaping ahead, considering 
hundreds of possibilities and making highly intricate and involved 
computations. " 

Having thus checked and tested every function of his department, Breckenridge 
plugged into "Captain," and when the green light went on: 

"Chief pilot check-out--all x," he reported briefly. 

"Hi, Jill! This is Mase--I've told you about him. Their warrings, their 
strifes, their inter-necine intrigues and connivings were inevitable because of 
the tremendousness and capability--and the limitations--of their minds. . " 

There was a moment of silence, then Kinnison went on: 

"But wherever diamonds are, there go Dutchmen. We will see to it. "No one 
except the very few selectees will know anything about it. " Olmstead opened up 
for inspection. Straight out into the ocean it sped, through the murky red 
veil, and darted upward toward the surface. Give me the suit and I'll change 
now. Furthermore. . . so. Order me up two more, then--one at half of what I've 
got here, the other double it," and he reeled off the figures for the charge 
and the casing of the explosive. "You might break out a jar of burn-dressing, 
too. Not green in color; sort of purplish. "Don't tell us it's Terra again, 
Dark Lady, please. I'll get you any stars you want, and bring them right in 
here to you. I'm quite. No human brain can take it all, I'm afraid, especially 
all at once, but I'm going to kinda peck around the edges and get me some dope 
that I want pretty badly. Which was practically all the time. Teddy Blake and I 
both thought of that, but we'll consider it only as the ultimately last resort. 
Thus, what started out as a conference of two became a full Ardan staff 
meeting; a meeting which, starting immediately after lunch, ran straight 
through into the following afternoon. In fact, it was learned later that she 
lost only forty men. 

"Well, bunch," it said in a matter-of-fact voice, "there's no mental exercise 
in you and you're such a low form of life that you're of no use on this planet; 
so I'll dematerialize you. " He was a man transfigured. "You mean that one 
shipload of despicable humans who--far too late to do them any good--barred us 
temporarily from Fuel World?" 

"Not exactly or only those humans, no. . " 

"Stop it!" she commanded, sharply. He did see, now. 

There were doctors, doctors, doctors; operations, operations, operations. 

"Interstellar Spaceways, you know. 

"Carney, two. Soon the full calculated power was on and the acceleration became 
constant. Newton to be called to her own television set, the door behind them 
opened. " Stevens spoke thoughtfully as Nadia darted away. 'Chancellor Ferber 
is in conference and cannot be disturbed,'" he mimicked, savagely. "Put him on 
now--but _quick_!" 



The tri-di tank brightened up; Chancellor Ferber's image appeared. "Search 
them; all their weapons may not have been in their armor. Seal the doors and 
mount special guards, tuned to me here. " 

Imprisoned they were, and carefully searched; but they bore no arms, and 
nothing had been said concerning communicators. "It boils down to this: I must 
either welcome you or destroy you. I haven't got one myself, so I don't know 
very much--ulp!--about it at first hand, but from what the boys tell me it must 
be. . . . Oh. 

"Oh, how horrible!" cried the girl, her voice breaking. But, since human beings 
do not like to live eternally underground, no matter how beautifully lighted or 
how carefully and comfortably air-conditioned the dungeon may be, the 
Reservation spread far beyond the foot of that gray, forbidding, mirror-smooth 
cone of metal. So I'll have to talk, even though I'm not half ready to--I don't 
know enough. Its projectile, so barely discharged, did not explode--it was 
loaded with material which could be detonated only by the warhead upon impact 
or by a radio signal. The temperature of Europa will suit you. Good thing, too. 
Next corridor left, I think. I've never been any closer to it than this, and I 
never will, so I don't know anything about it except what I hear; but there's 
something about it that kills men or drives them crazy. Admired you. Hero, sort 
of. . Thank you, sir," and Mr. " 

"Oh, you. "Who cares anything about the rock and dirt of a _planet_? It's the 
people that count and his are dead and he's perfectly _complaisant_ about 
it--just _lonesome_!" 

"Don't let it throw you, pet," James soothed. "He's an Arpalone, you know; not 
a sociological anthropologist. "He has a good skeleton, very good indeed. Or, 
if a little colane had been rubbed on it which no Tellurian could have noticed, 
any Venerian could smell it from one end of that lake to the other. " 

"True. I fully intended to serve, one way or another, in this your home. " 

"One did. " She shook hands warmly. If they take the initiative they can't 
prevent us from presenting our evidence in full; and there is no court in 
existence, however corrupt, before which we could not win. Didn't you notice 
that while we were eating they talked together for at least fifteen minutes 
about her father's invention and the way they stole the plans and one thing and 
another? I don't believe he has talked that much to any girl except me the last 
five years--and he wouldn't talk to me until he knew that I couldn't see any 
man except you. " The Osnomians' labored breathing became normal as the 
air-pressure increased to a value only a little below that of the dense 
atmosphere of their native planet. " 

"If all you did was to set up the integrals, how do you know what you are going 
to have for the next meal?" asked Crane. 

"That is quite possible; for, fortunately, our art is not yet entirely 
intellectual, as is our music. "It is evident, of course, that I cannot 
qualify; nor do I know anyone personally who can. 

After making certain that the visiray was precisely synchronized and phased 
with the searching frequency, he built up the power of that beam until it was 
using twenty thousand kilofranks. There were continents, oceans, ice-caps, 
lakes, rivers, mountains and plains, forests and prairies. He was too busy, had 
too many worthwhile things to do, to waste time that way. He would have pounded 
a lot of sense into his skull, if he had lived. 

A siren--creeping up from behind. Edging inward, lane after lane, he reached 
the "unlimited" way--unlimited, that is, except for being limited to cars of 
not less than seven hundred horsepower, in perfect mechanical condition, driven 
by registered, tested drivers at speeds not less than one hundred and 
twenty-five miles an hour--flashed his registry number at the control station, 
and shoved his right foot down to the floor. 



Now everyone knows that an ordinary DeKhotinsky Sporter will do a hundred and 
forty honestly-measured miles in one honestly measured hour; but very few 
ordinary drivers have ever found out how fast one of those brutal big souped-up 
Sixteens can wheel. " 

"Everything goes that has any copper in it," he said coldly, "and I am glad to 
see that Seaton is too good a chemist to buy any platinum jewelry. "It's a 
relief to follow something I can see, instead of trying to guess which way that 
beam's going to wiggle next. How about calling it the 'Galactic Service'? 
Applicable to either war or peace. Some of them would of course reach and 
destroy some of our ships. " 

"What was the smoke we saw, then?" 

"That was their food-supply. "Get that idea out of your head right now. With 
its great speed it reached the monster before the plane was overtaken. Well, 
we'd better break away. " 

"Good night, Daddy dear," she replied, throwing her arms around his neck. 

"Yeah. " Solarian Councillor Virgil Samms spoke to his companion as the 
opponents changed courts. When he had finished, Wilson brought his fist down 
upon his desk. It was like touching a high-voltage wire. Then, fused, 
volatilized, flaming incandescent throughout the length, breadth, and height of 
a dwelling, that dwelling's existence thereafter is to be measured in minutes. 
"And I want to see Pilot James close up, too, sir--he's not nearly as wonderful 
as you are, sir--and I wonder why Planetographer Bellamy's hair is green? Very 
striking, of course, sir, but I don't think I'd care for it much on me--unless 
you'd think I should, sir?" 



Belle knew, of course, that they were coming; and Garlock knew that Belle's 
hackles were very much on the rise. " 

"I see why they would. Without a word into the transformers they seized Bradley 
and Clio. Then, supporting her at the window, he held his Lewiston upon the 
captive's head while Costigan propelled him toward the opening. Nadia followed 
suit and the man laughed as she wrinkled her nose in disgust as two faint, but 
unmistakable odors smote her olfactory nerves. 

"What's the matter with it, Steve? It looks like a picture in slow motion, like 
the kind they take of your dives--or am I seeing things?" 

"No, it's really slow, compared to what we're used to. Then, "Listen, all of 
you. 

The blood-smeared hilt turned in his hands; the blade struck flat and broke, 
its length whining viciously away. In your primitive culture the women may 
still be allowing you men to believe in the fallacy of the superiority of the 
male, but know right now that I can do anything any man ever born can do and do 
it better. At _practical_ stuff, and that's all we give a whoop about, I lay 
over both them sissies like a Lunar dome. 

"You have done a great deal for me--for us," she said simply. Jack would have 
brained him if any of them had been on. 

"Of course Jill's going, if anybody does!" he burst out vehemently. . . . . . 
lines of character and of humor. . . But how about this? Suppose we take a fast 
tour, with you and I taking quick peeks, without the peekees ever knowing we've 
been peeking?" 

"That's using the brain, Belle. He was used to death, in many of its grisliest 
forms. 

"Hold everything, Dick!" Crane snapped, as Seaton bent over one of the bars. 
"Operation Bullfinch--Off!" he managed to say. " 

And four hundred seventy one highly skilled men, carrying duplicate keys and/or 
whatever other specialized apparatus and equipment would be necessary, quietly 
took possession of four hundred seventy one objects, of almost that many shapes 
and sizes. Art in the forefront of those few I spoke of. And take this not 
_too_ seriously, for I expect fully to live. 

Verna, the irrepressible, was in the control room of the _Sirius_, quarreling 
adroitly with Brandon and deftly flirting with Crowninshield. This was the 
Administration Area. " 



With a casual wave of her hand, Temple strolled away; and there, flashed 
through Sandra's mind what Hilton had said so long ago, little more than a week 
out from Earth: 

". He kicked a lever and the lifecraft's port swung open--to reveal a blaze of 
light and a startled, gray-haired man. He was my jailer, and I utterly loathe 
and despise him. He was now a Big Shot--damn the luck! He could be and must be 
responsible for broad policy and for general strategy, but, once those vitally 
important decisions had been made, the actual work would have to be done by 
others. 

The H-blast--the city-wide warning for the planned and supposedly orderly 
evacuation of all Chicago--sounded, but Kinnison did not hear it. "That's all I 
want--a chance. You'll hafta figure damn close to a hundred pounds of air to 
the foot on plain cuttin'--that's two hundred and a quarter. 

In due time the long, slender body of the rocket-plane came into view, creeping 
"down" upon the space-ship from "above," and Cleveland bade his friends 
goodbye. The planet tipped, lurched, spun, and danced. Do your worst; I shall 
not speak. " She got up and stared directly into his eyes, her lip curling. "I 
thought it was wonderful!" 

"I didn't. . " 

"Enough. We have kept your trust. So I'll still be a virgin when we're married. 
" Now in the sickroom, Brandon picked up the headset and sent out a wave of 
cheery greeting. "In view of the Code, locking your door is a meaningless 
gesture. " 

"There is, however, reason enough; although I am not sure that I can make it as 
clear to you as I would wish. That is, a part of it became en rapport with a 
part of his: years were to pass before even the First Lensman would know much 
more about the Palainian than he learned in that first contact; no human beings 
except the Children of the Lens ever were to understand even dimly the 
labyrinthine intricacies, the paradoxical complexities, of the Palainian mind. 
Mercury is absolutely the only thing that will do the trick and the mercury is 
one thing that is conspicuous by it's absence in these parts. So are tungsten 
for filaments, tantalum for plates, and platinum for leads; and I haven't found 
anything that I can use as a getter, either--a metal, you know, to flash inside 
the tube to clean up the last traces of atmosphere in it. Do you still believe 
that you can keep me from remembering whatever it was that my ancestor was 
compelled to forget?" 

"Now that you have obtained a focal point we cannot prevent you from 
remembering; and merely to hinder you would be pointless. I've lost too much 
money that way already. 

"Second; drugs, vice, and so on. A planet might perhaps be mentioned as 
representative of a class, but no individual entity lower than a Plooran was 
named or discussed. " 

"Sure not; and of course you yourself would go. Then, suddenly, his face 
cleared. 

"Do you mind, sir, if we sleep on the floor at the sides of your bed?" Larry 
asked. 

"No, no, Dick," remonstrated Dorothy, seizing his arm. Not by those names, of 
course. 

"Well, that for that. Below it, to its left, dropped other benches being made 
by other mining machines. Nor was it alone. Both knew that it would take five 
years of advanced study before either of them could understand the simplest 
material on the doctor's tapes. They did not need it, of course. Undisturbed 
for over two hundred seventy-one thousand years. " 

"Therefore we will not question the Omans. 

"Wouldn't work. This isn't going to be pretty to watch--or to do, either, for 
that matter. Now, however, it was broken in midspan and the two ends bent 
toward the floor. Planetography. " 

"Why not?" Belle smiled and began to act as one of the party. "Especially since 
we can't use more than one point----" 

"One point _zero_ gravities," Jones put in. 

"Over the long pull--and the women--you're right," Deston agreed, and took out 
his slide rule. They're lost, and still going. Even those lenses wouldn't 
deflect them if they weren't solid fields of force. Both vessels were equipped 
completely with iron-driven mechanisms; both were manned by scientists capable 
of wringing the highest possible measure of power from their installations. No 
other lifecraft had escaped. The Eddorians must not learn of us until after it 
is too late for them to act effectively upon that knowledge. The windows are 
made of optical glass similar to that used in the largest telescopes. 

Hilton canceled all moves aground and issued orders that no Oman was to be 
allowed aboard ship, then looked and listened with his staff. . . . a 
stalemate. . well, so ghastly that it simply gives me the blue shivers just to 
look at one of them!" 

"They're pretty gruesome, no fooling," he agreed, "but you get used to things 
like that. " 

"You think I'm safe, then?" 

"Absolutely. . . . . they'll think up a good reason for _everybody_ to be 
together, and that itself will be the tip-off. Ferdy will probably draw on 
me----" 

"And he'll kill you," Jones said, flatly. Lithe and poised, he was the epitome 
of leashed and controlled action. Moose was six-feet-four and weighed a good 
two-forty--stolid, massive, solid. If he had had time to get his muscles ready, 
he might have had a chance. "Oh of course--but you couldn't really believe a 
thing like that without seeing it, could you? Oh, Steve--how utterly horrible!" 



The "Barkodar" had dropped down into a line of sister ships, and had gone into 
action in midair against a veritable swarm of foes. . yes. . . . But of course 
we're--I mean you're responsible only to yourself. The neck, even, is 
endurable, although it is long and flexible, heavily scaled, and is carried in 
whatever eye-wringing loops or curves the owner considers most convenient or 
ornamental at the time. Soon the space-car came to rest over a great city, and 
Seaton pointed out the palace; which, with its landing dock nearby, was very 
similar to that of Nalboon, in the capital city of Mardonale. The glass-blower 
waved his hand and Nadia severed the form neatly with a glowing wire, just 
above the fluid surface of the glass remaining in the pot. Blue-black rings 
encircled both eyes. His powerful body slumped. "There's only one boat we stand 
a chance of reaching, and somebody's mighty apt to see us. But the Second 
thinks not--what do you think, Costigan?" The bluff commander, reactionary and 
of the old school as was his breed, was furious--baffled, raging inwardly to 
come to grips with the invisible and indetectable foe. They're smart. I say 
Jupiter, because I would think, judging from the small size of the ship, that 
it may still be in the experimental stage, so that they probably didn't come 
from any further away than Jupiter. Come what may of god or devil you need not 
fear it, for I and all with me fight under Llosir's shield. He stripped to the 
skin and the observer smeared his every square inch of epidermis with the 
thick, gooey stuff that was not only a highly efficient screen against 
radiation, but also a sovereign remedy for new radiation burns. 

When he opened them an instant later, it was broad daylight, the boulders had 
been rolled away, the fragrance of roasting meat permeated the atmosphere, and 
Nadia was making a deafening clamor, beating his steel breastplate lustily with 
the flat of his huge saber. " 

Hilton covered the first half of the line at a fast walk. "What is your 
decision?" 

"I submit, in the hope that you will keep your promise, since there is no 
alternative but death," and the awful creature, still loosely held by the 
attractors and carefully watched by DuQuesne and Loring, fairly tore into the 
task of rebuilding the Osnomian power-plant into the space-annihilating drive 
of the Fenachrone--for he well knew one fact that DuQuesne's hurried inspection 
had failed to glean from the labyrinthine intricacies of that fearsome brain: 
that once within the detector screens of that distant solar system these 
Earth-beings would be utterly helpless before the forces which would inevitably 
be turned upon them. 

"What hideous, deformed creatures they are! Truly a low form of life, even 
though they do possess some intelligence. You see, I'm getting so rabid that I 
can't trust myself. " 

"That would seem to be good business, sir. "Shall Brownie and I set our 
blocks?" 

"No," Belle said. "Nothing can interfere with us now. It's just that I don't 
like the conditions. 

"Why, I don't see a thing, Steve--where and what is it?" They were dropping 
vertically downward toward the center of a vast plain of white, featureless and 
desolate; and Nadia stared in disappointment. "The Gaul is done--Patroclus all 
but had him there!" 

"One thousand, you!" came another challenge. I'm going to smoke it in honor of 
our engagement. We're almost there, darling. There's nothing dense enough 
around here, even in the core of the central sun, so we're going out to a white 
dwarf star--one a good deal like the companion star to Sirius in Canis 
Major--get some material of the proper density from its core, and convert our 
sender into a fifth-order machine. " 

"But they couldn't do _anything_ without you two!" Bernice exclaimed. " She 
snuggled her head down into the curve of his neck. 

And Newman misinterpreted those smiles completely; especially Bernice's. They 
command the spectrum in a way undreamed of. " Dark Lady raised her voice enough 
to be sure Sawtelle heard the title, and shot him a wicked glance as she 
announced it. Three-quarters of the staff were lolling on the sand or were 
seated on benches beside the immense pool. " 

"But you said you _never_ went screens down with a woman?" 

"There's a first time for everything. 

"If you can think of another way, Jim, the meeting is still open. 

The next day they worked nine planets, and the day after that they worked ten. 
With those qualities your race can easily double its present span of useful 
life. 

"This worldwide frenzy of unrest followed closely upon the controlled 
liberation of atomic energy and may be--probably is--traceable to it. She 
grinned and turned to the Omans. She turned in flight, but the stranger caught 
her in three strides. . . " Tuly paused, licking her lips in that peculiarly 
human-female gesture of uncertainty. Then they whistled in unison. 

Chunks of solid or semi-molten rock slammed against the hull, knocking off 
wings and control-surfaces. Definitely. " 

"How _sure_ are you of this, Miss Samms?" Knobos asked, in deadly earnest. 
"Figure it out. " 

"All right--but I'll bet it's slower than the rise of a toy balloon. So you'd 
better rod out one of the glory holes and. 

A few months later, Sumner called Kinnison into the office. "What would I do 
with it?" 

"We need not go into that here or now. " 

"I don't think so, either. Would you be willing to sell us plans, or lease us 
ships. . . Thank you, sir," and Mr. Now, if you'll help me find my stuff and 
bring some of it--a computer and so on--up to the lounge?" They did so; the 
"and so on" proving to be a bewildering miscellany indeed. And for her part, 
more and more was Margaret drawn to the quiet and unassuming, but utterly 
dependable and steadfast young inventor, with his wide knowledge and his keen, 
incisive mind. . . and statuary. D. Q. and S. "Don't fool yourself, chick. He's 
a smart man, and before this is done he'll know that he'll have to keep his 
nose clean. See?" 

"Oh. . but the hunch was getting stronger and stronger all the time. . I 
was--must have been--wrong. Not even in bed. Now we'd better get organized old 
partner, for a long campaign. " 

"I understand, all right; but I can't understand the power of these rays. There 
is no coercion whatever. Some had only broken wings; some were dead, but more 
or less whole; many were blown to unrecognizable bits and scraps of flesh. " 

"Don't they ever jam?" asked Dorothy curiously. Since it was found to contain 
copper in notable amounts, all agreed that its planets probably also contained 
copper. 

They tried it, one after another. Very slowly at first, but faster and faster. 
Besides, if I have to suffer just a little bit for good appearance's sake in a 
matter of intergalactic amity. " 

"All right. Seaton, with half this stuff, could whip the combined armies and 
navies of the world. Vaneman, ate such a dinner as he had not eaten in weeks. 
After the meal was over they all went into the spacious living-room, where the 
men ensconced themselves in comfortable Morris chairs with long, black cigars 
between their teeth, and all four engaged in a spirited discussion of various 
topics of the day. All around that district we have erected barriers of force, 
maintained by a corps of men known as 'Guardians of the Sedlor. No drivers, no 
steering-wheels, no instruments or push-buttons. Three destinations for each 
set-up; near, medium, and far. 

Most of the crews and all of the teams except the First were working on side 
issues--tasks which, while important in and of themselves, had very little to 
do with the project's main problem. And the "crackpots" were extremely 
surprised to find themselves hopelessly lost in uncharted galactic wildernesses 
every time they did not think, definitely and positively, of one specific 
destination. 

Like fire, only worse, intra-atomic energy was a good servant, but a terrible 
master. Eight of the huge rooms were now open and brightly lighted--operating 
the lamps had been one of the first items on the first spool of 
instructions--with a cold, pure-white, sourceless light. 

"As you were, fellows--lie down again and take it easy. A thorough exploration 
of all the tight connecting cells revealed that not a lifeboat within their 
reach remained intact, but that habitable and navigable portions of three such 
craft were available. D. under Montrose would have to know explosives, and the 
F. B. " 



The big psionicist's expression of saturnine, almost contemptuous amusement had 
not changed; his voice came flat and cold. " 

"I don't see anything interesting thereabouts except stars. You said you 
weren't going to fight with me any more. " 

"This ought to be good. There was always the chance that we wouldn't get drawn 
into it. Parent and child fell upon the hexaped and soon bones and hair were 
all that remained The slender shoots then wandered about the unconscious girl 
in her strange covering, and as a couple of powerful tendrils coiled about her 
and raised her into the air over the monstrous base of the thing, its 
rudimentary brain could almost be perceived working as it sluggishly realized 
that, now full fed, it should carry this other victim along, to feed its other 
offspring when they should return to its side. 



Barely outside the door of the "Forlorn Hope" Stevens whirled about with a 
bitter imprecation. Nostrils flaring, the mighty beast raged forward and Tedric 
struck as he had never struck before. Eight times that terrific blade came 
down, and eight men and eight horses died. 



Ten or fifteen minutes later, Garlock felt Lola's half-excited, half-frightened 
thought. " Samms smiled disarmingly. The crowd, many thousands strong, was 
cheering. " 

"Power!" the dumbfounded Russian exclaimed. "You're no more a commander than my 
lowest office-girl is! Just wait 'till you get down here, you green-haired 
hussy, you shameless notor. Didn't you see him knock Perkins down when he came 
after me?" 

"Well, maybe he has a few gentlemanly instincts, which he uses when he doesn't 
lose anything by it. And it looks good--these are first-class cages they've 
given us. And, in spite of medical advice, Dutch babies arrive. Therefore 
Theodore and Bernice Jones came aboard Lifecraft Two, and Deston asked Newman 
to flit across to Lifecraft Three. " 

Deston was about to say something, but Barbara forestalled him. "Since it is 
axiomatic that his destruction would have weakened Eddore somewhat and to that 
extent would have helped us, it is evident that some greater advantage will 
accrue from allowing him to live. Nor does it matter whether it be day or 
night, or whether anyone is awake or asleep. 

Thus one of them, fractionally more powerful and more ruthless than the rest, 
became the All-Highest--His Ultimate Supremacy--and a group of about a dozen 
others, only infinitesimally weaker, became his Council; a cabinet which was 
later to become known as the Innermost Circle. Since you have taken it upon 
yourself to exceed your authority to such an extent as to refuse to connect the 
officer in command of the _Pleiades_ with the Chancellor, I cannot report to 
him either the reasons why we are not landing at this time or when we expect to 
return to Tellus. The Lens, immediately upon removal from the Patrolman's arm, 
ceased to radiate and the operative who held the thing died. Many other worlds 
of these systems are inhabited by more or less intelligent non-human races. 
Greed, thirst for fame, longing for power, and so on, including many qualities 
usually regarded as 'noble. ' And what I promise, I deliver. " Deston gazed 
thoughtfully at the incandescent tip of his friend's cigarette. . but after 
all, if the big dope didn't realize that half the women aboard, including 
Sandy, had been making passes at him, she certainly wouldn't enlighten him. You 
are certainly right in principle, and the poundage can be determined by 
statistical and psychological analysis. They're handy little outfits--almost 
impossible to find, and capable of a lot of things. 

Through the airlock, down through several levels of passengers' quarters they 
hurried, and into a lifeboat, whose one doorway commanded the full length of 
the third lounge--an ideal spot, either for defense or for escape outward by 
means of the miniature cruiser. Isaacson, how many predecessors have I had on 
this particular job, and what happened to them? The Patrol get them?" 

"Two. No; we have not been able to find any evidence that the Samms crowd has 
any suspicion of us. Both were too small for the job; neither could handle 
personnel. Pioneers, they have been called. They worked, and are still working, 
in the newest, outermost fringes of the field. . . . . . I _know_ it, I tell 
you!" 

Without another word, without asking permission to leave, Bergenholm whirled 
around and hurried out. That I shall find that secret I am confident; and, 
having found it, I shall, without your aid, destroy the Fenachrone. I know how 
to use most of it, from seeing it in use, and we can figure out the rest. " 

"There are a lot of things none of us has thought of, but as amended I'll buy 
it. 

"Thanks. "Morning, you two lovely people. " She hugged Hilton's arm as usual. 
"You wanted a diversion, didn't you?" 

"Yes, but you already. " 

"Like this," and, taking down a sheet of drafting paper, Cloud sketched 
rapidly. "He's splendid, really, and I like him a lot--usually. Talk about a 
game fish! He doesn't intend to run any more, though, so I guess we'll have to 
put him away. Six metal pipes, one above the other, ran above and parallel to 
each sidewalk-lane of water. He looked at the biggest, toughest one of the 
six--a rock-drill-eyed, red-haired giant--and asked: 

"What did they tell you, Tworn, that your job was going to be?" 

"They didn't say. These builders were not workmen, in the Tellurian sense. 

"I know a little; not much. Then came four helicopters, darting and hovering, 
whose gunners picked off individually whatever survivors had managed to escape 
all six waves of fighters. " 

"Now you are lying by rote--I know just what you'd do," said DuQuesne. Crane," 
replied Margaret eagerly. "He should recover consciousness in an hour or so. 
Anyway, I'm sure that we'll get back safely. They haven't blown us up, and they 
could have done it easily enough. 

"Sure you got your caffeine tablets?" he demanded as they ran. "I've seen 
mirages before, but never anything like that. " 

"No jams ever have occurred. We've got to know how far away from home he is, 
whether he has turned in any report about us, and all about it. Snap it up, 
ace!" 

The transmitter unit was installed at the converters, the cable was torn out, 
and, having broken the last material link between it and Ganymede, Stevens 
hurled the "Forlorn Hope" out into space, using the highest acceleration Nadia 
could endure. He found the ledge and emerged, scraping thick and sticky mud 
from his uniform. He saw. UNMARRED! For an instant Tedric felt as though he 
were about to collapse; but sheerest joy does not disable. 

There was nothing left to do except make the links, hinge-pins, and so on for 
his armor, which did not take long. "The sooner you realize that you must do 
exactly as he pleases, in all things, the easier your life will be. I don't 
really expect that, but if they can keep him busy long enough, we can get far 
enough away so that he won't bother about us any more. . . . . . " 

"I doubt very much if there's one low enough," Garlock cut in sharply. One 
minute and fifty eight seconds. We simply fixed the bearings, put on some minor 
improvements, and here we are. 

But as they passed through the shadowed portal the man's head perked to the 
right. 

"Not unless I have to," he replied, composedly. " 

"That's good. 

"No language spoken by man possesses words sufficiently weighty to express our 
indebtedness to you, Karfedix Seaton, our guest and our savior. 

Then for minutes a spectacular battle raged. All of us feel the same way, but 
some of us are unable to express ourselves quite so vividly. The probability 
approaches unity that the Masters continued to delve and to learn for millions 
of cycles while you Stretts, reasonlessly certain of your supremacy, 
concentrated upon your evolution from the material to a non-material form of 
life and performed only limited research into armaments of greater and ever 
greater power. It was no cheerful conclusion at which the Arisians arrived, 
since their visualizations all agreed in showing that the only possible method 
of wiping out the Eddorians would also of necessity end their own usefulness as 
Guardians of Civilization. It is heavy enough to swing us away from a small 
planet, but it will be used up long before we strike. The walls of the pit were 
steeply, unstably irregular, varying in pitch and shape with the hardness and 
refractoriness of the strata composing them. 

"Ha! Help--I hear footsteps approaching on jet-back," Garlock announced. One 
and one-half detets away, loafing along at the freighter's speed and 
paralleling her course, in a hemispherical formation open to the front, there 
flew six tremendous tear-drops; super-dreadnaughts of whose existence no 
Tellurian or Colonial government had even an inkling. Each nation has several 
nations or tribes of savages, which inhabit various waste places. Each 
produced--extruded--members whenever and wherever it needed them; members 
uniquely appropriate to the task then in work. 

On the other hand, the Arpalones were madly, suicidally determined to break 
through that vortex wall, to get into the "eye," to wreak all possible damage 
there. "All talking--if any--will be done by First Lensman Samms. " 

"Now, all you millions of Telenews listeners, I am interviewing First Lensman 
Samms himself. "Stanley and Emerson will be here in a moment. In the meantime, 
who's calling? I don't recognize your voice, and it's been so long. 

"Go back to your own quarters and stay there until I send for you," the Nevian 
directed, and as the Terrestrials obeyed the curt orders the cruiser tore 
herself from the water and flashed up into the crimson sky. I have never seen 
an undertaking of such size go forward so smoothly and with such fine 
co-operation. This device that you see connecting us is a Callistonian thought 
transformer, by means of which any two intelligent beings can converse without 
language. There it is heterodyned with another wave--this second frequency was 
found after thousands of trials and is, I believe, the exact frequency existing 
in the optic nerves themselves--and sent to the receiving headset. There will 
be twenty sections of ten persons, each section being in charge of one of the 
officers of the _Arcturus_. Bolt-holes stared empty, cores, shielding cases and 
needles had disappeared, the vital parts of every instrument hung awry, 
disorganization reigned rampant and supreme. 

"I never imagined such a mess," the captain said, after a long and silent study 
of the objects. 

"Is it possible, Lord Sir, for any human being to do anything with this foul, 
slimy, salvy, perverse, treacherous, and generally-bedamned stuff?" 

"It is. . Oh, I don't know exactly what it is they lack. There is an attempt 
now being prepared. And through it all Hilton and Sandra listened. Solid 
columns of men, marching as fast as they could step--there weren't trucks 
enough to haul them all. Believe me, ace of my bosom, I don't wonder that it 
cost them lives to build it--with their conditions, I don't see how they ever 
got it built at all. It's a wonder I didn't blow up the whole works. " 

Stevens took the controls and slowly worked along the outer edge of the mass, 
down toward its extremity. 

"Listen, you bird-brained, knot-headed, grand-standing half-wit!" he stormed, 
voice low but bitterly intense. Hilton went up into what he still thought of as 
the "control room," even though he knew that there were no controls, nor even 
any instruments, anywhere aboard. 

Laro opened a cabinet and took out a disk about the size of a dime, pendant 
from a neck-chain. Instead, he lowered his burden to the floor, spread her out 
flat, and sought out and removed item after item of wiring, apparatus, and 
offensive and defensive armament. He did not undress her--quite--but he made 
completely certain that the only weapons left to the young lady were those with 
which Nature had endowed her. "Wouldn't take as much as a kiloton equivalent, 
would it?" 

"Half a kilo is plenty, but no use being too fussy about precision out here. " 
DuQuesne also turned away, to shield his features from the mind-reading gaze of 
the Fenachrone. Shiro's ready vocabulary of peculiar but sonorous words failed 
him completely, and he bent himself double in a bow, his yellow face wreathed 
in the widest possible smile. Crane, one arm around his wife, seized Shiro's 
hand and wrung it in silence. We have been awaiting you for more than five 
thousand years of your time. Your opinion of me is now on record, witnessed by 
your officers and by my staff. Thus, no matter how peaceable your intentions 
may be, many of our human beings would die before you would, but you will not 
live to get back to your ship if you land it and leave its protective 
insulation. Though surprised, they were not to be frightened off, but with 
wild, shrill screams rushed to the attack. " 

"That's good enough for me. "I feel as though I'd been bucking waves, wind and 
tide for forty-eight straight hours without food, water or touch. Belle and I 
are paired. We'll need five minutes at each planet--quite a ways out. Thick, 
dry gloves covered with rubber are all that is necessary. It's a good thing for 
all of us that you have those fancy condensite handles on your levers, Seaton. 
It's the most wonderful thing I saw on the whole trip. Jim and I have more to 
draw on for the long shifts than you have. "Where do we fit in?" James asked. 
They populated Ardu, where we Omans were developed. " 



Both men looked around the vast room and Karns said: "All the comforts of home 
and a couple of bucks' worth besides. " 

"Very well. "You made your bombing runs on that target, too, my sweet, and 
didn't score any higher than I did. . . m. . . . but he wasn't. ' Have you any 
idea how long it will be? I _hope_ I can hold out, with you all supporting me, 
but. Those birds have got real brains and they're on the track of something 
that will, in all probability, be as far ahead of Roeser's Rays as our present 
system is ahead of the science of the seventeenth century. The rays would set 
the woods afire, and the metal would condense all around. But just before the 
picture became too small to reveal details a few tiny dark spots appeared above 
the banks of cloud, now brilliantly illuminated by the rays of the rising 
sun--dots which might have been fragments of either vessel, blown bodily from 
the depths of the ocean and, riven asunder, hurled high into the air by the 
incredible forces at the command of the other. " 

"Thanks a lot. Ha! There goes his beam--pay me the four, Quince. " 

The dazzling wall of incandescence had blinked out without warning, and 
Brandon's beam bored on through space, unimpeded. I would like to stay and 
study these people a little while, but we must get back onto the trail of the 
Nevians," and the _Boise_ leaped away into space, toward the line of flight of 
the amphibians. " He got up and started purposefully toward her, but both 
non-combatants came between. 

Finally, one man discovered the truth--and faced his strange destiny in the 
ultimate struggle for control of the Universe. I'll give him sixty seconds to 
decide which. . . so. . . . . 

"Scream as much as you please. "They'll run that bunch of crap through, and 
then. Up it he ran, toward a main corridor. Costigan turned to his companion, 
and even through the helmets she could see plainly the white agony of his 
expression. 

"Your armor's in that bundle there. The firelight shone through the chinks 
between the boulders, casting a flickering ruddy light throughout the little 
cavern. " 

"Don't worry, Dad. In a few minutes, the First City was reached, and the 
_Skylark_ descended rapidly to the surface of a lagoon at one end of the city. 
In order to get   | | the gravity effect, a positive or    | | negative 
acceleration could be given | | out. It's the canals in the inner ear that do 
most of it, you know. As to banding on the repellers--that's easy. With this 
background, and being a quick study, and under the masterly coaching of Virgil 
Samms, Nels Bergenholm, and Rularion of North Polar Jupiter, it did not take 
him long to learn the various gambits and ripostes of this non-physical, but 
nevertheless no-holds-barred, political mayhem. You don't need to talk 
loud--just a mutter will be enough. " 

"What difference does that make?" he asked, in honest surprise. We do not know 
what questions to ask. We are in total ignorance of the ultimate structure of 
matter, and of the arrangement and significance of those larger aggregations of 
matter, the galaxies. . but he wasn't. " 

"Not 'might', son. You've answered my questions, after a fashion, except the 
stinger. " 

"Rocket-oil! Suppose we don't find anything at all?" 

"You're right, Jim," Belle said. You can knock off now, if you like. . " 

"I said I was coming after you, and if I get away I'll be there. I pretty 
nearly asked you the way, Dunark--forgot that I know it as well as you do. 
Knobos and DalNalten are trying to find out if there's anything to the idea 
that there may be a planetary, or even inter-planetary, ring involved. He has 
caught the _Endymion_, and has killed about half her crew doing it. 

He was aroused from his stunned inaction by the entrance of his colored 
laboratory helper, and silently motioned him to clean up the wreckage. . . . " 

"Jones. Your ignorance and unwillingness to believe any new idea do not change 
the facts in any particular. In you, wildest fancy had become commonplace. When 
the light is brightest Nero will ride in parade. 

"Hi, boss! Better we eat, huh? Not only am I starving by inches, but if we 
don't eat pretty quick we'll get only one meal today instead of three. She then 
attacked his biceps and, leaning backward, eyed him intently. She's always the 
observer, never the participant. Also, she is and always will be scared half to 
death of you--she thinks you're some kind of robot. 

"We shall begin at once," and the massive Martian as he replied, stepped over 
to the calculating machine. "If you think that there is any danger, we will 
crowd them all into the _Sirius_. " 

"Go ahead. " Gordon gritted his teeth in rage, but gave the order. 

"I doubt it. 

"Thank you, no, Miss Childs. Crown, give me a squad. . . " 

"While they figure out how much they can tax it?" Sawtelle asked, sardonically. 

"I'll say it would. "All talking--if any--will be done by First Lensman Samms. 
Therefore we need not worry about them. " 

Deston was about to say something, but Barbara forestalled him. " 

"I know it. Remember what I told you: that necklace will warn you of any 
spy-ray in the ether, and the watch will detect anything below the level of the 
ether. " 

"But it's supposed to be only about nine-tenths," she objected. Undressed, 
you're sitting ducks; and if you put out any screens it'll crystallize their 
suspicions and they'll grab you right then--or maybe even knock you off. You'd 
better get out of here at full blast; you can't do any more good here, the way 
things are. . . . . Can't put a finger on exactly what it is, but it's there. 
"I'm overloading now so badly that some of my plates are getting hot--if I hold 
this voltage much longer, the whole secondary bank of tubes is going out. I 
would have been demanding food long ago, but I have so many aches and pains 
that I didn't realize how hungry I was until you mentioned it. " 

"Go to it, twelve if you like. 

"All right, Dicky," she replied, the color flowing back into her cheeks. Fifty 
pounds of salt is a ridiculously cheap price for what he is doing for us, even 
though it is very rare here. 

"Calling strange spaceship--you must be a spaceship, in spite of your 
tremendous, hitherto-considered-impossible mass--" a thought impinged on all 
four Tellurian minds, "do you read me?" 

"I read you clearly. Have the tracers located him?" 

"No, they haven't been able to synchronize with his wave yet. Either he is 
using a most minute pencil or, what is more probable, he is on a frequency 
which we do not ordinarily use. " 

"But we've _got_ to do something, man! We can't just sit here and twiddle our 
thumbs!" 

"Why, and why not? That course seems eminently wise and proper. "That could 
turn out to be a long, tough brawl, and your dogs'll be begging for mercy 
before you get back here. You, of your own force, can not know that you are in 
fact incorruptible. Break precedent, sire, I beg, and wear me this armor of 
proof instead of the gold; for what we face promises to be worse than anything 
you or I have yet seen. Sorry I had only one of these ultra-wave spies, but 
once we're together it won't be so bad. Here's what I thought we could do," and 
he went over in detail the only course of action which his survey had shown to 
be possible. " He handed Tworn his blackjack. 

Finally, one man discovered the truth--and faced his strange destiny in the 
ultimate struggle for control of the Universe. The _Kondal_ followed, although 
the observers could see that Dunark was raging. Four full-grown fontemas rolled 
away from the spot upon which two had met; their courses forming two mutually 
perpendicular straight lines. Although he did not look at the Faros his eyes 
asked questions. Attuned to his mind, working smoothly with it, giving it 
strengths and qualities which no Rigellian ever had had or ever would have, 
were the two strongest minds of Earth: that of Rod the Rock Kinnison, with the 
driving force, the indomitable will, the transcendent urge of all human 
heredity; and that of Virgil Samms, with all that had made him First Lensman. 

"TELL!" that terrific triple mind demanded, with a force which simply could not 
be denied. Follow me. Cover him like a blanket. 

Unchallenged he made his way to the control room, and his curt "urgent report 
for the Captain" admitted him there without question. On his Diesel, at a 
distance of just over one detet, he would follow the outlaw as fast as he 
could; long enough to establish his line. "They'll have 'em here in fifteen 
minutes. . . Advise you that while at the present time the War Department is 
unable to use you. . . " 

"Lay it on the line, Jim. "Mr. Clancy! Mr. Edwards!" 

"To hell with Clancy, and Edwards, too," Jones barked. "Gimme the Chief 
Engineer and the Head Surveyor, and gimme 'em _fast_. " 

"Clancy speaking, Station Twelve. Being in Crane's form, he drew slowly, as 
Crane did; and Seaton, with the dexterity of much sleight-of-hand work and of 
years of familiarity with his weapon, drew and fired in one incredibly rapid 
movement, before the other had withdrawn the pistol from his pocket. 

Wherefore, out in open space, the Earth a fast-shrinking tiny ball and Sol 
himself growing smaller, paler, and weaker at a startling rate, the _Chicago's_ 
speed attained an almost constant value; a value starkly impossible for the 
human mind to grasp. In leaving this holy place all will file between me and 
the shrine. The crowd promptly fell back, leaving a clear space of several 
hundred yards. You know exactly where it is, you can draw it, you can define 
it, compute it, and work with it--but still it doesn't exist; there is 
absolutely nothing to differentiate it from any other volume of air, and it 
cannot be detected by any physical or mechanical means. " 



"Oh!" breathed the girl. " Hilton digested that concept for several minutes. As 
semantician. 

Margaret went to her room immediately, and as she did not return, Dorothy 
followed. For those "monstrous" beings are a highly intelligent and extremely 
sensitive race, and our--to us--trim and graceful human forms seem to them the 
very quintessence of malformation and hideousness. 

Armor donned and tested, the three Terrestrials stared into the observation 
plates, watching the rapidly-enlarging picture of the Nevian space-ship. 

"You can play that straight across the keyboard of your electric, pet, and not 
with just two fingers, either. "You look like you're seeing ghosts! What did 
they do to you?" 

"Nothing--much. . . " He started to continue the battle, then shut himself off. 
"The most widely applicable operator known. And, unfortunately, I do _not_ know 
what it is. " 

"Oh. " Karns sat down, leaned over, and took a cigarette out of the box on the 
desk. You know what I mean. The ablest at synthesis and correlation and so on. 
The only possibility of obtaining pictures is that machine you have just 
developed. What physical science can devise and synthesize, physical science 
can analyze and duplicate. 

Seaton made his way to the power-plant, lifted in one of the remaining bars, 
and applied a little power. 

The planet Strett became a nova. For the bed was a raised platform of something 
that looked like concrete and, except for an uncanny property of molding itself 
somewhat to the contours of their bodies, was almost as hard as rock. This must 
be, because you are the actual peyondixer. But you know that I love you just 
the same, even though I do appear to neglect you," he continued with fierce 
intensity. They were utterly useless, in design and function far different from 
the real instruments intended for the Skylark. I also advise you to build for 
yourselves many ships like those of the Fenachrone, with which to do battle 
with the invaders, in case I should fail in my quest. Build a plane to 
accelerate at forty-five meters and we will blow those hexans out of the ether. 
The rafts should be done, or nearly, by the time we get there. Such screens 
necessitate the projection of pure, yet dirigible, forces--you do not have them 
upon your planet?" 

"No, and so far as I know such screens are also unknown upon Mars and Venus, 
with whose inhabitants we are friendly. For two days the two 
jacks-of-all-trades worked at many lines and with many materials before Stevens 
called a halt. " 

"We will have no traffic with the enemy whatever," said the general. A plate 
came to life, showing Morgan's big, sweating, passionately earnest face. You 
call it mewing and purring, I believe?" 

"Yes," the flabbergasted Samms managed to say. " 

"I see," said Crane, and Dorothy, the irrepressible, put in: 

"Just as clear as so much mud. Guess we'll have to take time to get another 
vessel. I'd like to drag in the pieces of that ship, too--his instruments and a 
lot of the parts could be used. " 

"We've been having a wonderful time!" Dorothy declared. You've got all of 'em 
you're going to get. The Navy crew is normal, except for the commanders being 
unusually young. The heavy hair of the women and the close-cropped locks of the 
men were green as well--a green so dark as to be almost black, as were also 
their eyes. " 

"So will you, Junior, believe me. This time there was neither shrieking nor 
yelling; the weird creatures advanced silently and methodically. You have 
guessed that we are headed for Osnome?" 

"I suspected it. We're covering Virgil and I called up support in force. " 

Deeper and deeper the lifeboat was dragged by its dreadful opponent, whose 
spiked teeth still tore savagely at the tough outer plating of the craft, until 
Costigan reluctantly threw in his power switches. Nothing on Earth except a war 
could get them together or hold them together. Look sharp. " 

"Of course," Seaton continued to argue as he peered out into the night, "it is 
theoretically possible that a heavenly body can exist large enough so that it 
could exert even this much force and still appear no larger than an ordinary 
star, but I don't believe it is probable. Transpose it into platinum or 
uranium--anything good and heavy. For one of these monsters you'd need two or 
three micrograms. The problems facing us are complex, since there are some nine 
thousand forcebands of the order in which we are working, each differing from 
all the others as much as torque differs from tension, or as much as red 
differs from green. Side rockets and torpedo tubes were likewise sliced away 
and the helpless body of the Callistonian cruiser, falling like a plummet, was 
caught and held by a tractor ray. Captor and captive settled toward the ground. 

"This is a signal honor," observed Captain Czuv when he had revived. " 

That discussion, which lasted for days, was held. Though so intellectual that 
they themselves were incapable of producing music of real depth of feeling, 
they could understand and could enjoy such music with an appreciation 
impossible to a people of lesser mental attainments; and their profound 
enjoyment of her playing, burned into her mind by the telepathic, almost 
hypnotic power of the Norlaminian mentality, raised her to heights of power she 
had never before attained. 

"Why don't you play us some real music, Dottie?" asked Margaret, after a time. 
There were shelves, or rather, tight racks, of books; there were sun-lamps and 
card-shelves and exercisers and games; there was a receiver capable of bringing 
in programs from almost anywhere in space. " 

"I know it. " 

"Put them on. "She's been kicking around under foot ever since she was knee 
high to a duck--we gave her her first lessons on a slide rule. . . and am 
working with such _pitifully_ inadequate instrumentation--However, we have 
months of time yet, and if I am unable to arrive at a conclusion before 
arrival--I don't mean a rigorous analysis, of course, but merely a stop-gap, 
empirical, pragmatic solution--we will simply remain in orbit around that sun 
until I do. This whole situation stinks. Here and there were massed groups of 
hundreds, dragging behind them engines which Stevens studied with interest. 
There were a few whose arrangement was almost orderly. "We assume that the 
Stretts know that as well as we do. If we can keep away from them until their 
beam attenuates, we can whittle 'em down to our size and then take them, no 
matter how much accumulator capacity they've got. " 

"I say do it first, then we know we will get results. . . say we want a 
stationary population of a hundred million on our planet. Each couple to have 
two children, a boy and a girl. 

Several Strett skeleton-ships had been detected at long range, but the 
detections were inconclusive. Does anyone wish to amend this summation as 
recorded?" 



No one did. I can get into action in a hurry when I have to, and my idea now is 
to wait until they relax a trifle, and then slip a fast one over on them. . . " 

"It wouldn't seem anything of the kind," she broke in earnestly. "I _was_ 
pretty stiff, I guess, but I'll be good. " 

"Crawl, what?" 

"I crawl, sir. For a man as brilliant and as penetrant in every other respect. 
They were not the twinkling, scintillating beauties of the earthly sky, but 
minute points, so small as to seem dimensionless, yet of dazzling brilliance. " 

"Alone? Why?" 

"Because I cannot call in help; cannot let anyone know my goal. 

"We have no idea what the form, flavor, or consistency of any dish will be," 
was the surprising answer. In the long-ago time when it was made, the 
techniques were so crude and imperfect that sometimes a brain was constructed 
that was not exactly like the Guide. Finally, however, it slowed to a halt and 
the Terrestrial visitors disembarked at a portal of the Europan city of the 
Callistonians. 

"I didn't think I could get away with it--they're keen, that gang--but I had to 
keep at it as long as it would have done us any good. "You must have had help 
to get that far off--no one man could possibly be as wrong as you are. Let's 
meet in Brandon's room instead of here. Did you bring along any of my clothes, 
Dick, or did you forget them in the excitement?" 

"I didn't think anything about clothes, but Martin did. "Chip-chop the comedy, 
gang. So shut down the plant and get everybody out here. 

"What folly this?" Phagon yelled. 

Jack Kinnison piloted and navigated and computed for his friend and boat-mate: 

Mason Northrop; who, completely surrounded by breadboard hookups of new and 
ever-more-fantastic complexity, listened and looked; listened and tuned; 
listened and rebuilt; listened and--finally--took bearings and bearings and 
bearings with his ultra-sensitive loops. Then, one day, this kid Bergenholm 
ambles into their shop--big, awkward, stumbling over his own feet. 



Seaton had worked from early morning until late at night, but had rigorously 
kept his promise to Dorothy. Years were to pass before he could forget, even 
partially, the theretofore unsuspected dwellers in the dark recesses of his own 
mind. Nevertheless, from the store of whatever it was that made him what he 
was, Virgil Samms drew strength. Either 'Adams' or 'Andy' will do very nicely. 
Maybe he's figured out a _variable_ time of some kind or other. If so, you 
might have something; but I'm damned if I can see exactly what. In either case, 
is the correct word 'unknown' or 'unknowable'? Will any human gunner _ever_ be 
able to fire an Oman projector? There are a hundred other and much tougher 
questions, half of which have been scaring me to the very middle of my guts. 

"I am glad beyond measure to have known you," Barkovis mused, one night. You'll 
have to drink it through a straw. What do we do now?" 

"We get busy on the big tube. Also, let me remind you that I am in a hurry. 

But Roger, while not exactly a ground-gripper, did not know how to handle 
himself without weight; whereas Costigan, given six walls against which to 
push, was even more efficient in weightless combat than when handicapped by the 
force of gravitation. The impact jerked the arm downward and sidewise, both 
bones of the forearm snapping as it struck the ledge. 

"How about this?" one of the mechanics asked of his immediate superior. "How 
come you no blow the dinner bell? Power's on--come give it a look!" 

There was no answer to his hail, and Stevens paused in shocked amazement. Kedo, 
as Master Captain Sawtelle's Oman, will give the orders. Nito will serve Master 
Snowden and supply the knowledge he says he has forgotten. " 

"Okay. It was filled with swirling, gyrating bands and streamers of energy so 
vivid and so solid as to resemble fabric; with wildly hurtling objects of 
indescribable shapes and contours; with brilliantly flashing symbols which 
Samms found, greatly to his surprise, made sense--not through the Rigellian's 
mind, but through his own Lens: 

"EAT TEEGMEE'S FOOD!" 

"Advertising!" Samms' thought was a snort. 

Number Three was equally unproductive of helpful results. 

"I don't know; but even if I do, _she_ won't be anything like _her_," Eddie 
said, to the closing door. "Of course, we aren't attacking them, either, but 
you'd think. . . You see, Clee, I really expected you to come in, last night, 
and there really _wasn't_ any bone in it. Of course I could have found out from 
Brandon, but never paid any attention to it. He went to the trouble of 
kidnapping you, so naturally he won't let Perkins or anybody else kill you 
until he is through with you. 

But he was wasting time. 

"That's _exactly_ what I think--and I'm so close to knowing it for a fact that 
the difference is indetectible. There was much to study, many improvements to 
be made in his comparatively crude first ultra-camera. There were many 
projectors, which--at a rough guess--were a hundred times as powerful as any I 
have ever seen before. And besides. 

"Think over a couple of things. "The way it is, we've each got a grandson--it'd 
be tough to have to share one with _you_. Nice work--_very_ nice. All the 
comforts of home, eh?" 

"Just about. Perhaps two hundred feet distant and a hundred feet above him was 
the tower room in which were Clio and Roger. "Let us away! Let the lions roar 
and let the welkin ring!" 

"Who's been feeding _you_ so much red meat, little squirt?" Hilton laughed and 
turned away, meeting Sandra in the corridor. The thing to do now is to figure a 
way out of this. 

"Nobody knows how it leaked. Things no Terran science has ever even imagined; 
things at the formation of which all neighboring space actually warped, and in 
that warping seethed and writhed and shuddered. The lancing plane cut through 
one end of their control room, and Stevens leaped with his companion toward the 
new-made opening; while the air shrieked outward into space and their suits 
bulged suddenly with the abrupt increase in pressure differential. First: the 
Eddorians can be overcome only by mental force. Second: the magnitude of the 
required force is such that its only possible generator is such an organization 
as the Galactic Patrol toward which we have been and are working. Third: since 
no Arisian or any fusion of Arisians will ever be able to spear-head that 
force, it was and is necessary to develop a race of mentality sufficient to 
perform that task. Fourth: this new race, having been instrumental in removing 
the menace of Eddore, will as a matter of course displace the Arisians as 
Guardians of Civilization. Fifth: the Eddorians must not become informed of us 
until such a time as it will be physically, mathematically impossible for them 
to construct any effective counter-devices. " 

"A cheerless outlook, truly," came a somber thought. Both swerved, so that they 
came together wheel to wheel. 

Seaton looked from Dorothy to Margaret and back again; looked down into her 
violet eyes, deep with wonder and with love, more beautiful than any jewel in 
all her gorgeous costume. James sat down beside her and soothed her until she 
quieted down. 

"How long does it take to learn this bombing business, Jim?" Lola asked. Of 
course, the more power they waste on us, the quicker we can take them; but I 
don't want much more of that beam, I'll tell the world--I just about had heart 
failure before they cut off!" 

The massive heptagon was now drifting back toward Jupiter at constant velocity. 
Even at that, though, it's a good thing that space isn't a perfect vacuum, or 
we would have been clear out of the Universe by this time. Shall I send it in?" 

"By all means; to Dr. It always has been. Thus the endeavors of most of the 
battlers upon both sides, while earnest enough and deadly enough of intent, 
were almost comically unproductive of result. 

Number Four produced a surprise. The wire ran out--and ran--and ran--and ran. 
But even as the blow landed Costigan had seen that there was a third enemy, 
following close behind the two he had been watching, a pirate who was even then 
training a ray projector upon him. . So you finally saw the light?" 

"Yes. Their seventy-two-hour flight without a pilot had seemed a miracle, now 
it seemed entirely possible that they might fly in a straight line for weeks 
without encountering any obstacle, so vast was the emptiness in comparison with 
the points of light that punctuated it. Their teeth were a brilliant and 
shining grass-green. But most potent of all was a weapon unknown to 
Triplanetary warfare. " 

Seaton nodded permission, and from the eyes and from the hands of the figure 
there leaped visible streams of force, which seized the transformers, coils and 
tubes, and reformed and reconnected them, under Seaton's bulging eyes, into an 
entirely different mechanism. Slow and awkward at first, Lola soon picked up 
the technique and was firing blast for blast with the others. No more loaded 
transport vessels left the moon. " 

"And they'll keep on building," Samms said. "She's been kicking around under 
foot ever since she was knee high to a duck--we gave her her first lessons on a 
slide rule. . " began Nadia, but broke off as an aide came up and saluted 
smartly. In response to the question he thought for a moment, then smiled 
slowly. " 

"Seest, father?" 

"What thinkst me, vixen, a spineless cuddlepet? From this minute 'til return 
here I match your paragon youngblade loll for loll, cup for cup, wench for 
wench. Maybe it's a purely mechanical affair that they use for observing. . . . 
" 

"Ready to roll, Clee," James announced. 

"He hasn't been putting tracers on you, Jill, on accounta he figured he'd be 
poaching. If he has not been touching it ever since it came down, it is only 
because someone stronger than he pushed him aside. It's good--designed to carry 
on our civilization. Some passenger--disguised--slugged the Chief--took his 
suit and projectors--hole in duct--p-s-s-t! All washed out! Maybe that's all he 
was scheduled to do to us in this performance, but he'll do nothing else in his 
life!" 

"Don't go down there!" protested the girl. Lousy job, though--three of the gang 
got away, and took about a quarter of the loot with them. That was what I want 
to talk to you about in such a hurry--fake meteors; the first I ever saw. We 
can't do both. " 

"Well, our copper's getting horribly low. He must know what these Lewistons 
will do, and he knows that we'll get a chance to use them, some way or other, 
before he gets to us again," Costigan asserted, confidently--but again he was 
wrong. He already knew ore--the glossy, sub-metallic, pitchy black luster of 
uraninite or pitchblende; the yellows of autunite and carnotite; the variant 
and confusing greens of tobernite. 

"A wheel, and maybe some of the axle, of the other ambulance, is all," one of 
the men assured him. "They ought to show, at least a little, and even I can't 
see a sign of them. It's too ghastly--I won't stand for your trying it, so that 
ends it. That popcycle of mine has got legs, too, and there won't be so much 
traffic, the way I'm going. . " 

"_How_ I know!" Kinnison exclaimed, feelingly. "Take the Lieutenant-Captain's 
station, please. Show him what you've got; then tear into that pilot plant. " 

Rounding a great metal statue about fifty feet from the base of the towering 
dock, they saw that the door leading into one of the elevators was wide open 
and that two guards stood just inside it. You're right--that's one reason I'm 
not First Lensman. . . " 

"Perpetual motion--ridiculous!" snapped from the sending disk upon the helmet 
of the master of mechanism. 

"Life again," James said. Much better, they thought, to let things ride as 
nearly as possible exactly as they had been aboard the _Perseus_. Long, tearing 
canine teeth. Carnivorous. I'll call them just 'guardians' until we find out 
what they really are. " 

Delcamp and Belle both stared at Garlock; Belle licked her lips. Catapult after 
catapult was dragged to the lip of the little canyon, until six of them bore 
upon the target. The huge stranded springs of hair, fiber, and sinew were wound 
up to the limit, and enormous masses of rock were toilsomely rolled upon the 
platforms. 



The Dilipics were using projectile weapons only--ranging in size, with the size 
of the vessels, from heavy machine guns up to seventy-five-millimeter 
quick-firing rifles. 

"What you and Bill suggested," Hilton whispered back. This stuff is 
DEKON--short for Decontaminant, Complete; Compound, Adsorbent, and Chelating, 
Type DCQ-429. Her cargo was valuable, of course--the sine qua non of 
inter-stellar trade--but in no sense precious. 



The next morning, after breakfast, James followed Garlock into his room and 
shut the door. At the end of the last such discussion, a couple of hours out 
from the transfer point, Jones lit a cigarette savagely and rasped: 

"Wherever you start or whatever your angle of approach, he _always_ boils it 
down to this: 'Subjective time is measured by the number of learning events 
experienced. However, when the information he had given Atterlin spread 
throughout the city--and it did not take long--no one paid any more attention 
to him than they did to each other. You see, sir, we also serve during sleep. 
Now let us, if you please, take a few seconds of time to get acquainted, each 
with the other. " 

By exerting his authority, Hilton got Sawtelle put through the "Preservatory" 
in the second batch processed. "Why not?" 

"That should be self-explanatory," Hilton said, flatly. " 

The creature, now in the shadow of the 'Troncist's helmet, slowed down 
abruptly--went limp--collapsed. "It depends upon whether his fear of you or his 
anger is the greater. Glowing, the Lens is perfectly harmless; it is 
complete--saturated--satiated--fulfilled. In the dark condition it is, as you 
have learned, dangerous in the extreme. 

This being, human to the limit of classification except for a faint but 
unmistakable blue coloration, had been closeted with Senator Morgan for a 
matter of two hours. "Do you mean we'll have to blast _normal_ to a system?" 

"It isn't as bad as you think, Babe," Jones said. When this tapestry wall is 
finished, it will not be simply form and color, as it is now. 

Roger's first thought, upon discovering what tremendous and inexplicable damage 
had already been done, was to destroy instantly the two men who were doing it. 
High acceleration is punishment for anyone and we must keep ourselves fit. 
Countless hundred of fine vertical scratches marred every inch of her surface, 
and here and there the stubborn metal was grooved and scored to a depth of 
inches--each scratch and score the record of an attempt of some wandering 
cosmic body to argue the right-of-way with the stupendous mass of that man-made 
cruiser of the void. 

A burly young man made his way through the throng about the entrance, nodded 
unconcernedly to the gatekeeper, and joined the stream of passengers flowing 
through the triple doors of the double air-lock and down a corridor to the 
center of the vessel. Moving to the accompaniment of strange martial music from 
concealed instruments, the two parties approached each other, meeting at the 
raised platform or pulpit where Karbix Tarnan, a handsome, stately, middle-aged 
man who carried easily his hundred and fifty karkamo of age, awaited them. Clio 
sobbed in relief and Costigan, one arm around her, sighed hugely. She was 
refreshed, buoyant, ravenously hungry and highly amused. "You'd better turn 
yourself in for an overhaul. " 

"Nice scheme, Belle," Garlock said. D. And a Miss America type, like all the 
other women aboard this spacer. 

"Stop them, Rod!" Samms cried. " 

"But listen, Mr. "Aren't you or Larry afraid to take such an awful chance as 
that?" 

"Afraid? I grasp the concept only dimly, from your minds. And no chance. " She 
looked at him questioningly. " The scientist's mind had been quivering with 
eagerness. "In that I understand your viewpoint thoroughly. But what should I 
have done, knowing that there is no practical defense against the atomic bomb? 
Every nation has them, and is manufacturing more and more. I told you I had a 
hunch, and Alcantro and Fedanzo worked out the right answer for me. Line him up 
in the big one and give me the word, will you?" 

"I see him, Dick, but it is not DuQuesne's ship. It is built of transparent 
arenak, like the 'Kondal. 

But he stuck to the calculated course, and at the precisely correct instant he 
cut his drive and released his largest bomb. Did you see a pink serpent 
carrying it away? Take my advice, old son, if you want to stay in Uncle Sam's 
service, and lay off the stuff, whatever it is. " Deston thought for a moment. 
"Since it is axiomatic that his destruction would have weakened Eddore somewhat 
and to that extent would have helped us, it is evident that some greater 
advantage will accrue from allowing him to live. . . . ah!" 

The moment had arrived, before the touch of any revealing ray. He trained the 
key-tube, the entrance opened, and through that opening in the instant of its 
appearance there shot a brittle bulb of glass, whose breaking meant death. 41 
automatic at his hip was as much a part of his uniform as his pants. Somebody 
has burglarized this safe and taken almost half of the solution, filling the 
vial up with colored water. " 



"Questions have already been asked and answered," Larry said, going to the door 
and opening it. "I paid, as I have always paid, the fraction due. I will give 
him a share--say fifty percent, or forty--of the time and effort I save on my 
own projects!" 

"Just so you _go_, Tallick. . could it be that intergalactic travel is actually 
possible? But excuse me, Captain Garlock, none of that is any of my business; 
which is to determine whether or not you four Tellurian human beings are 
compatible with, and thus acceptable to, our humanity of Hodell. . but after 
all, if the big dope didn't realize that half the women aboard, including 
Sandy, had been making passes at him, she certainly wouldn't enlighten him. If 
we knew just a_ little _more I'd say go. When the attacker has been repulsed, 
they don't chase him a foot. The creature simply was not thinking at all. "I 
crawl. And what little I do know I can't tell, because it isn't mine. "Wonder 
how we came out? They should have reported before this--p-s-s-t! Here it 
comes!" 

Decontamination was complete; Operation Zunk had been a one-hundred-percent 
success; there had been no casualties. Either they underestimated our strength 
at first, or else it required about eight seconds to tune in their heavy 
generators--probably the former. . . By Klono's brazen bowels, it would 
work--it'd _have_ to work--he'd _make_ it work! And grimly, quietly, but alive 
in every fiber now, he drove back toward the city practically as fast as he had 
come away. Seven hundred of those ships, and all his men, were now arrayed in 
defense around Ardry. " 

"All wrong, old top. " Samms' voice was quiet and steady; his eyes held those 
of the other. Air and space craft went clear out to Emergence Volume Ninety to 
meet them. The suit neither flopped nor clung, but stood out, comfortably out 
of the way, all by itself. 

". He could no more understand the Tellurian's sensitivity than Samms could 
understand the fact that to these people, even the concept of physical 
intrusion was absolutely incomprehensible. After a few minutes he approached 
the abutment and searched its face with the help of his flash-light. By the 
time they finally destroy the Osnomians--if they do--we'll have the world ready 
for them. Remember, Jarve, what you said about the irresistible force? We'll 
need it. " 

"Of course, you understand these instruments much better than I do, as yet. " 

"Well?" 

"And have you scream to high heaven that I opened it? And put me on a tape for 
willful inurbanity? For deliberate intersexual invasion of privacy?" 



"Blast and damn! You know perfectly well, Clee Garlock, I wouldn't pull such a 
dirty, lousy trick as that. "Since neither Jim nor I need an assistant any more 
than we need tails, it was designed to give you girls something to do. " 

"Against a man-mountain like that? You're _that_ good? Really?" 

"Especially against a man-mountain like that. "That was a relief of tension if 
there ever was one. Those snakes went about things in a business-like fashion. 
Also, having the metal may save us months of time in mining it. " 

"True, but neither of them was a strategist. . . . " 

"Objection overruled," interposed the lawyer, decisively. 

"But suppose he _had_ called you?" Sandra demanded. He punched the figures into 
his calculator, which would correct automatically for the motion of his own 
vessel--glanced once at the printed solution of the problem--tramped down upon 
a pedal once, twice, or three times, depending upon the number of projectiles 
he had been directed to handle. They studied the controls and alarm system 
until each knew perfectly every instrument, every tiny light, and the tone of 
each bell. 

"Hell's jets!" Deston exclaimed. I yearn not, nor did my father nor his father, 
to pit gold 'gainst hard-swung axe; e'en less to hide behind ten ranks of iron 
while others fight. And if you think she could _ever_ learn anything from me, 
skip it. He had studied it under test, in action, and at rest; studied it until 
he knew thoroughly its every possibility--and what a ship it was! The 
atomic-powered generators of his shielding screens handled with ease the 
terrific load of the Nevians' assault, his polycyclic screens were proof 
against any material projectile, and the machines supplying his offensive 
weapons with power were more than equal to their tasks. So cleverly was the 
entrance to the vault concealed in the basement wall that he failed to discover 
it. " 

And again, for days that lengthened slowly into weeks, the work went on. The 
captain stepped up to the plate and, upon being recognized, he received the 
exact orders which had been requested by the Chief of the Triplanetary Service. 
The ship lifted effortlessly, noiselessly. A measure of self-control regained, 
Stevens cut off his automatic sender, changed the adjustments of his directors 
and cut in his manually operated sending key. The time-machine disappeared; 
completely out of synchronization with any continuum that a world's keenest 
brain and an ultra-fast calculator could compute. However, unable with either 
weapons or bodies to break through the slanting walls of iron formed by the 
smoothly-overlapping shields of the Guardsmen, over the edges they went, the 
living and the dead. He called in his henchmen and issued orders. Well, the 
original Rodebush-Cleveland free drive was a killer, you know. You _can_ 
convert me, then. " 

"Thank you. " 

"I don't know what you mean. Then, taking his hand, she walked--almost 
skipped--along beside him. After half an hour he again slackened the pace and 
made another observation, finding to his astonishment that the dark mass had 
almost doubled its apparent size! Dorothy, noting his expression, was about to 
speak, but he forestalled her. 

"Somebody got quite a jolt then. 

They prepared and ate another meal, one to which Clio did full justice. So did 
Jill and her inseparable, Mason Northrop. High Brass came in quantity and the 
entire story--except for one bit of biology--was told. Not a cloud was to be 
seen in that flaming sky, and through that dustless atmosphere the eye could 
see the horizon--a horizon three times as distant as the one to which we are 
accustomed--with a distinctness and clarity impossible in our Terra's 
dust-filled air. There were almost as many attitudes as there were Primes; but 
all were essentially self-centered and selfish. When they finally left the 
pool, at about seventeen hours G. It seems that Roger was born at an instant of 
time sacred to the adepts, so they took him on. But what is past cannot be 
recalled. Black?" 

"Naturally," came the smooth reply. "In fact, I suggested it to them and have 
their approval. " 

"I didn't. Nothing actually moved. " 

"Yes, all of us do, and the way he acts proves what a machine he is. He 
returned with a small army of workmen, and after making tests to assure himself 
that the power-bar would work as well through arenak as through steel, he 
instructed the officers concerning the work to be done. Let me caution you now; 
do not let any Mardonalian touch our hands with a wire, for if you do, your 
thoughts will be recorded and the secrets of the Skylark and your many other 
mysterious things, such as smoking, matches, and magic feats, will be secrets 
no longer. Any effort to purchase it would be useless, however large a figure 
were named. " 

"You are not one of ours, Lord. The captain was asleep and was awakened by an 
alarm gong--only to find himself floating in a mass of wreckage. Seaton and 
Crane made another observation upon the Earth, requesting DuQuesne to stay out 
of the "engine room" as they called the partially-enclosed space surrounding 
the main instrument board, where were located the object-compasses and the 
mechanism controlling the attractor, about which DuQuesne knew nothing. With 
the vastly superior agility of his earthly muscles he dodged the falling 
broadsword and drove his left fist full against the fellow's chin, with all the 
force of his mighty arm and all the momentum of his rapidly moving body behind 
the blow. . anyway, it can't do any harm, and I know that he can hear and 
understand you. When working together, we will. Ray two-seven was operated in a 
range of frequencies far below the visible red. Any conductor in its path 
behaved precisely as it would in the Ajax-Northrup induction furnace, which can 
boil platinum in ten seconds! These three rays composed the beam which Seaton 
directed upon the mass of metal from which the enemy had elected to continue 
the battle--and behind each ray, instead of the small energy at the command of 
its Osnomian inventor, were the untold millions of kilowatts developed by a 
one-hundred-pound bar of disintegrating copper! 



There ensued a brief but appalling demonstration of the terrible effectiveness 
of those Osnomian weapons against anything not protected by ultra-powered ray 
screens. 

"About the uniforms," Lola said, eagerly. "A date of the Bennettan year. 
However, their ship will never bother us, that's one good thing; and I think 
we've got about everything of theirs that we want, anyway. 

"I fail completely to understand what effect such vibrations could have," the 
Rigellian announced finally, sublimely unconscious that anything at all out of 
the ordinary had occurred. It was mathematically certain that, when the Gunther 
field went on, the ship would be displaced instantaneously to some location in 
space having precisely the Gunther coordinates required by that particular 
field. However, nothing exact is yet known of their masses, motions, or places. 
General Crowninshield, you may remove the prisoners and deal with them in 
accordance with. Captain Czuv, you have made no headway with them?" asked the 
Director. 

"We're both tired of doing nothing, Czuv. Sixty-odd generations of men were 
born and died, but that was not enough. The Arisian program of genetics 
required more. This Lens simply appeared on my wrist, bracelet and all, out of 
thin air. In equilibrium at last--with our bodily and atmospheric temperatures 
finally constant at their present values, which seem as low to you as yours 
appear high to us. Here he lived alone save for an old colored couple who were 
his servants. 

"They've come back, Virgil!" The Commissioner rapped out without preliminary or 
greeting. Nerado and his two companions were escorted ceremoniously to their 
vessel, and the _Boise_ took off inertialess for Earth, bearing the good news 
that the Nevian menace was no more. Good sign, too--they aren't ready for us 
yet. They waited. Then, too, it is probably safe to assume that their vessel is 
damaged, to some slight extent at least; for I do not believe that any possible 
armament could withstand the forces you directed against them and escape 
entirely unscathed. 



Hilton made the hundred yards from office door to curb in just over twelve 
seconds. " Herkimer put something in his pocket, then slapped her so viciously 
that fingers-long marks sprang into red relief upon the chalk-white background 
of her cheek. "Not only quit before we start, but have all the top brass of the 
Octagon, all the hot-shot politicians of United Worlds, the whole damn Congress 
of Science and all the top-bracket industrialists of Terra out here lousing 
things up so that nobody could ever learn anything? Not in seven thousand 
years!" 

"That's right. How come you were smart enough to get the answer so quick, 
Brownie?" 

"Oh, the pattern isn't too rare. 

"We also have much to do. That was that. Therefore that which made Roger what 
he was; the essence which was Gharlane of Eddore; was actually back upon his 
native planet even before Rodebush completed his study of what was left of the 
pirates' vessel. " 

"Exactly what is the alternative?" 

"We will not go into that. " Patroclus shrugged his massive shoulders. He 
started to say something, then stopped in confusion, but Seaton divined his 
thought. Rapidly resuming his ordinary clothing, he stepped into his automobile 
and was soon back in his own rooms, poring over the blueprints and notebooks. 



Seaton and Crane both felt that something was wrong when they approached the 
landing field and saw that the landing-lights were not burning, as they always 
were kept lighted whenever the plane was abroad after dark. Fifteen minutes 
remained, during which time one department head after another would report to 
the captain of the liner that everything in his charge was ready for the 
stupendous flight. No. The enemy would now know that something had gone wrong, 
but he would not be able to do anything about it. " 

"I see. You'll see when we land. Garlock. 

"Just as bad--if possible, worse. 

"Oh, no--we could dance from now on," Verna assured him. "Your lovely 
complexion! Isn't it terrible for the boys to see us in this light?" 

There was a peal of delighted laughter from Sitar and she spoke to one of the 
servants, who drew dark curtains across the windows and pressed a switch, 
flooding the room with brilliant white light. I suppose that you have a lot of 
things to thrash out, so you may as well start now. They see the advisability 
of withdrawing a camera ship, but that is as far as they will go. You haven't 
perfected an instrument which enables you to see into a closed room and hear 
what is going on there, have you?" And upon being assured that they had not, he 
took his leave. I don't mind nitroglycerin or T. Hast a bag?" 

"Yea. " 

"I know not, sire. So they built another one, a lot bigger, and I am sure that 
they are following us, right now. 

A few months later, Sumner called Kinnison into the office. M. of Thursday, by 
the chronometer there. What say we shake it up?" 

"I check you to nineteen decimals," and the two were soon attacking the savory 
Ganymedean goulash which Nadia had put in the cooker many hours before. "I 
thought I knew all about it, but I don't! Do you, about yours?" 

They did not, not one of them; and they were all as surprised at that fact as 
the girl had been. It's fundamentally unsound. Some 
passenger--disguised--slugged the Chief--took his suit and projectors--hole in 
duct--p-s-s-t! All washed out! Maybe that's all he was scheduled to do to us in 
this performance, but he'll do nothing else in his life!" 

"Don't go down there!" protested the girl. " 

The report had not mentioned the Stretts. I was able to do him a small favor 
once, and I am sure that he will be glad to return it. Therefore, after we get 
a ship armed to suit us, we'll visit this strange planet and either come to 
terms with them or else steal a ship from them. . that is. It has seemed, right 
along, more logical than the girl--but a lot more fantastic. Suppose you 
could?" 

"I've no idea, really. Therefore your calculations, comprehensive though they 
are, cannot predict the effect upon them of your zone of force. 

"The president, the chief of staff, the Chief Justice, the most eminent 
scientist, the head of a church, the leaders of the legislative body and four 
political bosses, the biggest business man, biggest labor leader, and biggest 
gangster. . he is. . . I invited that one, I guess, since I know you aren't 
afraid of God, man, woman, or devil. I have nothing to hide. . . I shall settle 
with him. You're so full of conflict between what you want to do--what you know 
is right--and what those three-cell-brained nincompoops made you think you 
ought to do that you have got no more degrees of freedom than a piston-rod. 
George T. 

"Clio?" The lovely mother of their wonderful children appeared in his mind. 

The driver obeyed--literally. " Costigan could not afford to appear stupid, nor 
to possess too much knowledge. 

"Not exactly. So doing, one day, he came upon King Phagon and the Lady Rhoann 
practicing at archery. . . " 

"Let's talk the same language, shall we? Say 'he' and 'she. "We have never 
heard of them before. Czuv said something about an unknown race of 
monstrosities at the south pole of Jupiter--let's try it on them for a while. " 

He flung the field of force out into space, as responsive to his will as a 
well-trained horse, and guided it toward the southern limb of that gigantic 
world. "In this visualization I do not perceive anything to preclude the 
possibility that the Eddorians may at any time visualize us. His car is broken 
in some way, so that it will kill him the first time he tries to run it. 

After a brief farewell Cloud made his way to an elevator and was whisked down 
to the garage. But in Quartermasters' Department, deep down below the generator 
rooms, no thought was given to such minor matters as the disappearance of a 
_Hyperion_. " 

"You're welcome to it. "To the mature mind there is no such thing as status. 
Too small a charge scatters it around, in vortices which, while much smaller 
than the original, are still large enough to be self-sustaining. Also, as 
Second Thinker, your death at this time would be slightly detrimental to 
certain matters now in work. Bound to hit some humans. The frightful planes and 
beams of immeasurable power simply spent themselves harmlessly against those 
sparklingly radiant green walls--seemingly as absorbent to energy as a sponge 
is to water, since the eye could not detect any change in the appearance of the 
screens, under even the fiercest blasts of the hexan projectors. The Council 
has two principal operating agencies; the Triplanetary Patrol, which enforces 
its decisions, rules, and regulations, and the Triplanetary Service, which 
performs such other tasks as the Council directs. With only the headquarters 
lifeboat warm, the outer wall could be held pretty close to zero absolute. When 
one of those projectiles hits, we want to know where it ain't, that's all. 

Roger's first thought, upon discovering what tremendous and inexplicable damage 
had already been done, was to destroy instantly the two men who were doing it. 
"We were informed, and given proof sufficient to make us believe, that you were 
monsters from outer space--rapacious, insatiable, senselessly and callously 
destructive to all other forms of intelligent life. " 

"Indeed we shall, and thank you," Entlore said. "Also, nobody except us and 
your secretary knows that I am here. For a good many years I have made a 
specialty of that sort of thing. Our currency is based upon platinum, but gold, 
silver, and copper are valuable. I had just started to work when Crane's 
Japanese servant, who was supposed to be asleep, appeared upon the scene. If 
you have mentality enough to understand any portion of my mind--which I 
doubt--you already know the fate in store for you. So watch your step!" 

"You insufferable lug! I'd like to smash this racket over your head! I'll do 
it, too, and walk off the court, if you don't. And next time he sticks his ugly 
puss across that line, kick his face in. If this ship was escorted or guarded 
the fact was not apparent: and no Patrol vessel came nearer to it than four 
detets--Virgil Samms and Roderick Kinnison saw to that. What of it? What was 
death? What good was life, except to enjoy such thrills as he had just had and 
was about to have again? And besides, thionite couldn't kill _him_. 

"Oh, that's what you're going to use! You know, I've been wondering about that 
stuff. " 

"Good. " 

"Right. 

"I see. 

Seaton's arm contracted, swinging Dorothy into his embrace; their lips met and 
held. Would I be stepping on your toes if I give her a play?" 

"Clear ether as far as we're concerned. The thing was certainly alive; it 
throbbed and vibrated with vitality: equally certainly, it was not very 
intelligent. It turned now to the right, now to the left, as his weight was 
thrown to one side or the other. The fuel problem, however, is not a serious 
one, since Fuel World is not unique. 

In a few seconds it became clear that if any Black High Command existed, it was 
not in shape to function efficiently. 

Should he let the Thracian kill the Commander of his Guard? Or not? It didn't 
really matter, one way or the other. The Eddorians, it is believed, were older 
still. 

"None whatever," came flatly from Cloud. 

Help came, of course; and on the double. Freedom, air, water, power, and coal! 
Now as you suggested, we'll go places and do things!" 

"Suppose it's safe?" Her first eagerness to explore their surroundings had 
abated noticeably. "You aren't armed, are you?" 

"No, and I don't believe that there was a gun of any kind aboard the 
_Arcturus_. "But sex itself, primal and basic, the most widespread concomitant 
of life in this continuum, is completely illogical and paradoxical. " 

"First," Costigan broke in. If not, if they are fighting already--_there they 
are_!" 

The picture of the speedster's control room flashed upon the speaker. " 

"That wouldn't do, either, of course. 

"No idea. These channels run all over the city, and the amount of water running 
in each tube and the number of tubes in use are regulated automatically by the 
amount of traffic. Come and look at them, if you want to see something really 
beautiful. " 

"You know, I might take you up on that? Maybe not this same team, but I've got 
a notion to tape a recommendation for a re-visit, just to see how you get 
along. 

". 

"Suppose we blast you and your jets out of the air and land anyway?" Garlock 
asked. The clergy will worry about souls, too, but we won't. 



The Dilipics were using projectile weapons only--ranging in size, with the size 
of the vessels, from heavy machine guns up to seventy-five-millimeter 
quick-firing rifles. "We are about to pass within a few light-minutes of an 
uninhabited solar system. Forget that I am a woman. Fourth Officer Olmstead has 
the authority and the orders to put a half-ounce slug through the guts of any 
or all of you that don't jump, and jump fast, to do what he tells you. . . . 
gratification. " 

He bowed again, smiled, and went out. 

"Why, General Cardeen?" Lola asked. "The trend is ever upward; each peak and 
valley being higher than its predecessor. I shall remain with you until we 
land, and we may converse upon any topic of most interest to you. " Fully en 
rapport with the girl as he was, so that his mind received simultaneously with 
hers any stimulus which she was willing to share, it seemed as though a keen, 
handsome, deeply tanned face bent down from a distance of inches toward his 
own. Thank Heaven these strangers had sense enough to be friendly--all 
intelligent races should be friends, for mutual advancement. Now, if you'll 
help me find my stuff and bring some of it--a computer and so on--up to the 
lounge?" They did so; the "and so on" proving to be a bewildering miscellany 
indeed. 

Too far away to use their own weapons and facing only one small four-limbed 
creature, they considered their game already in the bag, but they had no 
comprehension of earthly muscles, nor any understanding of the power and range 
of a hundred-pound bow driving a steel-headed war arrow. 

"Seven!" boomed Carfon sternly, and the exuberant youth subsided. As the 
howling wail came to a climax in a blast of sound Kromodeor threw over a lever, 
as did every other projector officer in every other heptagon, and there was 
made plain to any observer the reason for the burns and scars in the tortured 
space between the lofty inner and outer walls of Vorkulia. 

"Fine business!" exulted Seaton. And they were all, he thought at first glance, 
the dregs and sweepings of the lowest dives in space. . . at least, I believe 
you. " 

"Second, we have a more specific obligation in that the life of many, many 
worlds has sprung from Arisian seed. "Merely a people who have adjusted 
themselves to their environment through conscious or natural selection. With 
your system of genetics, so much more logical and efficient than our strict 
monogamy, your race will undoubtedly make more progress in a few centuries than 
we made in many millennia. " 



Avengord agreed happily. "Seconds! Four! Three! Two! One! LIFT!" He touched a 
button and a set of plunger switches drove home, releasing into the forty-five 
enormous driving projectors the equilibrium power--the fifteen-thousand-and-odd 
kilofranks of energy that exactly counterbalanced the pull of gravity upon the 
mass of the cruiser. Simultaneously there was added from the potentiometer, 
already set to the exact figure given by the computer, the _plus_-equilibrium 
power--which would not be changed throughout the journey if the ideal 
acceleration curve were to be registered upon the recorders--and the immense 
mass of the cruiser of the void wafted vertically upward at a low and constant 
velocity. Cursing himself for an idiot he hastily left the building, and soon 
his motorcycle was tearing up Connecticut Avenue toward his sweetheart's home. 









Steel Becomes Interested 



Dr. Targets became fewer and fewer. Action slowed down. . 
