. thanks. "

Olmstead opened a frost-lined compartment; took out two half-liter bottles;
placed them and his open lunch-box invitingly on the low stone wall.



In spite of the terrific stress put upon the machine, every part functioned
perfectly, and soon after Seaton had lost consciousness the vessel began to
draw away from the sinister globe; slowly at first, faster and faster as more
and more of the almost unlimited power of the mighty motor was released. So was
her spectacularly filled halter. How do you like _them_ parsnips, Your Royal
Fatness?"

"I'll see about that!" Ferber stormed. "_How_ modest our Samuel has become!"

"Well, damn it, she is!" Bryant insisted. Then, suddenly, she whistled; the
loud, full-bodied, ear-piercing, tongue-and-teeth whistle which so few women
ever master. Her eyes sparkled and she began to laugh with unrestrained glee.
"After all, perfectly nice people do meet informally on shipboard; why not in
concourses?"

"Why not, indeed? And I'm perfectly nice people, I assure you. Or that there
were wheels--plenty of 'em!--within wheels. "

"That would be better yet. " Belle laughed and presented her lips to be kissed.
"See? Only a couple of inches from belt-buckle to backbone--dangerously close
to the point of utter collapse. "

"You poor, abused little thing!" Garlock laughed and all three crossed the room
to the dining alcove. Now we'll get the jack, Nadia," and they went back to
their vessel, finding that upon Saturn, their combined strength was barely
sufficient to drag the heavy tool along the floor. Who, in your opinion, is the
real boss?"

"Well, it certainly is not Herkimer Herkimer Third.

"Idealistic, in a way, but spineless and corrupt," Garlock announced to all.
Inch by inch the ocean's shoreline was driven backward toward ocean's depths;
but every inch the ocean lost was to its tactical advantage, since the
advancing front was by now practically filled with hard, solid, dead blocks of
its own substance which it could neither assimilate nor remove from the scene
of conflict.

Hence the wall grew ever thicker and solider; the advance became slower and
slower. "Modesty never got anybody anything but praise, and I prefer something
more substantial. However, I never exaggerate or make over-statements, as you
should know. First, they'll get it in time. Second, the new Rodebush-Bergenholm
fields. If their beams are designed principally for travel upon Jupiter, why
should they have any extraordinary range? I say they can't hold that beam
forever. " Skandos intended this for a clincher, but it didn't turn out that
way.

"Several things," he grinned.

Across the Park, edging over to the left so that the boys going south would
have room to make the turn--even such riders as those need _some_ room to make
a turn at fifty miles per hour!

Under the viaduct--biting brakes and squealing tires at that sharp, narrow,
right-angle left turn--north on the wide, smooth Drive!

That highway was made for speed. Vaneman, after the others had gone.

"Yes; your plan of getting the best men possible, paying them well, and giving
them complete authority and sole responsibility, has worked to perfection. I
have found that in one the power is liberated as a similar attractive force but
is focused upon the first object in line with the axis of the bar. . I have
never seen him close up before. Well, I found out that this man's brain was in
good shape, and I got a shock when I read it. "

"Well, I'll never tackle him with heat. Practically unhampered, except in
purely physical matters. But nothing of the sort happened--this merchantman was
_no_ push-over!

No ordinary screens protected that particular freighter and the person of First
Lensman Samms--Roderick Kinnison had very thoroughly seen to that. "

"A hell of a lot better without," Poynter said, and all agreed.

"I don't know. . I. I certainly do _not_ believe that we hit this planet by
chance against odds of almost infinity to one. "

"But can't they detect us anyway? They may have sent out a call, you know. " He
thought for minutes, then shook his head. " Jack scowled in concentration. What
shall I study?"

"That's what we must figure out. Unlisted. We're in completely unexplored
territory. You see, Jarve didn't want to do it at all, but he had to. How did
you repeal the Law of Conservation?"

"We didn't. Nothing makes sense. Two ambulances, a couple of hundred meters
apart, were coming; working their way along the road, between the holes. Now,
out of range, as they supposed, they halted and gathered about one who was
apparently their leader; some standing erect and waving four hands while
shaking their horns savagely in Stevens' direction, others trotting around on
four legs, busily gathering stones of suitable size for their vicious slings.
What was the real meaning of those facts?

He had become convinced that those three persons were no more human than was
Roger himself. "

"Arisia!" Samms exclaimed, and:

"Arisia! Of all the hells in space, why Arisia? And how can we make the
approach? Don't you know that _nobody_ can get anywhere near that damn planet?"

Bergenholm shrugged his shoulders and spread both arms wide in a pantomime of
complete helplessness. "

Hilton was appalled. This system we're headed for is a triple, and the chart
says it's a double. "

"How about Spencer, then?"

"I have nothing to say about her, she's not mine," responded DuQuesne with a
shrug.

"That's the most utterly _horrible_ thing I ever heard of in my life!" Lola
burst out. Anyway, such little, tiny, sisterly ones as this, and out in public,
don't count. "

"Oh, hell!" James snorted. "It must be low frequency, low-tension electricity,
which is never used, so far as I know. It is, however, something closely akin.
. . . and I wish I knew how she did it. Downward, in spite of the utmost
possible effort of every projector and generator; and Clio and Bradley, sick at
heart, looked once at each other. Then they looked at Costigan, who, jaw hard
set and eyes unflinchingly upon his plate, was concentrating his attack upon
one turret of the green monster as they settled lower and lower. They visited,
it seemed, every residence and every dwelling unit, everywhere. They waited. If
they're people, they know a sublime hell of a lot more than we do; and calling
it psionics or practical magic is merely labeling it, not answering any
questions. If you could act effectively against us now, you would be acting,
not talking. "

"What is the opposition?" Samms asked, quietly.

"See?"

"You _tricked_ me!"



"I did not. Up and up and up she went.

"We have no record of any planet named 'Tellus'; nor of any such ship as yours.
He took out the familiar jewels, estimating their value as he counted them--a
staggering total. "

At the end of the calculated time they saw the lights of a large city beneath
them, and Crane's fingers clenched upon Seaton's arm as he pointed downward.
"It must be low frequency, low-tension electricity, which is never used, so far
as I know. I put everything I've got behind a tracer on that beam, but haven't
been able to lift a single needle off the pin. I will not attack my home
planet. I suppose that you are natives of Jupiter?"

"Not quite. I am, and will remain, a Strett. . foggy, diffuse. . . . . . . . .
. but you aren't _listening_!"

"I'm listening, pops, but nothing is coming through. Its period is short--about
two days.

"For these reasons, you understand why Nalboon does not intend to let you
escape and why he intends that this kokam (our equivalent of a day) shall be
your last. "

"We have all been taking it for granted that you four belong to some
super-human race; some kind or other of _Homo Superior_. " She flashed him a
gamin grin and they went on into the control room. He set the bar at right
angles to the line of their fall and turned on the current. The gun
roared--what a gorgeous, what a heavenly racket that Maxim made! He traversed
until he could see where the bullets were striking: then swung the stream of
metal to and fro.

Now, systematically and precisely, the great Cone of Battle was coming into
being; a formation developed during the Jovian Wars while the forces of the
Three Planets were fighting in space for their very civilizations' existence,
and one never used since the last space-fleets of Jupiter's murderous hordes
had been wiped out. She's that auburn-haired beauty that the papers were so
full of when she came out last year. Brainy, but impersonal--academic. She
knows all the words and all their meanings, all the questions and all the
answers, but she doesn't apply any of them to herself. "If I thought anything
could ever come of it, though, I'd do it if I had to pound myself unconscious
with a club. We have forgotten nothing. "

The Tellurians did so--and in the very instant of appearance Garlock was met by
a blast of force the like of which he had never even imagined. " Alsyne smiled
again; not only with mouth and eyes, but with his whole hairy face. He opened
his eyes groggily; then, as a wave of humiliated realization swept over his
consciousness, he closed them again and shuddered. . " he began, and stopped;
utterly unable to speak. "They were green, as were men. As it is, they've
clipped off all our projectors, so we can't move, but I think we've got the
whole control compartment of number two lifeboat untouched. As soon as they had
started Dorothy turned in the embrace of her lover's arm. "What _did_ you do to
Bill?"

"Oh, you don't love me for myself alone, then, but just on account of _that_
big jerk?"

"That's right.

"Ah, a student. Lighter guns or something. Why, thousands of them must have
been killed, just in this last hour or so. "

"Foster!" Ferber yelled. "Besides, you couldn't, not to another prime. "

"Of course he's strong enough. . . . . . Uh-huh. . . . . . " His thought faded
out. "Clee, you talk like a man with a paper nose! Who else could run the
Project? That is," her whole manner changed; "he doesn't know I can run it as
well as you can--or better--but I could tell him--and maybe you think I
wouldn't!"

"You won't have to. It's _you_ who's been yowling for two solid years about
being ready for _anything_. You won't fall for her, either, Mase; you'll want
to pull one of her legs off and beat the rest of her to death with it inside of
a week--but there's nothing like finding things out for yourself. Didn't you
read paragraph 12-A-2, one of the many marked 'Top Secret'?"

"Of course. But we do not understand how purely mental qualities can possibly
have any effect upon purely physical transformations. Is it not so?"

"'Tis so! Long live Lord Llosir!" Tumultuous yelling filled the amphitheater. "

"At my word 'ready' you will begin to assemble all your mental force and power.
"Private papers only, sir!"

"Perhaps. Certain of the Councillors believe, however mistakenly, that there
are several things of interest there: such as the record of certain
transactions involving one James F. . . . . but he _couldn't_ go far enough but
there _had_ to be a way. Apparently they want to study us or something.

"There, ace, who said anything about weight-fiends? I was watching you, and you
never turned a hair that time. What are they, anyway? Animal, vegetable, or
mineral?"

"I don't know. "As I am in no danger whatever of hanging, nothing you can say
on that score affects me in the least. What would you do if our situations were
reversed?"

"I'd blast you to a cinder--or else take a knife and. You've fallen like a.
This whole system, Nevia, the colonies on Aldebaran II and other planets, even
Valeria, as tight as a drum. It cannot be scratched, cut, bent, broken, or
worked in any way except at such a high temperature that death would result, if
such heat were applied to the collar. More than one observer did sicken in
fact, and had to be relieved. " Phagon was very evidently skeptical, but looked
around the temple, anyway. " Morgan stopped drumming and smiled cynically. You
know what I mean. "

"That is an idea of promise, and one that had not occurred to any of us," Czuv
replied and work was begun at once upon the new flyer.

"What are you going to do with it, commercially? Dick, of course, hasn't
thought of anything except this space-car--equally of course, you have?"

"Yes.

Kinnison gulped.

The First Lensman, who had been in and out, came in to stay. "Steel's got her,
but they won't keep her long. Don't worry, we'll get her. Alcantro!

"Here!"

"Round up the gang, will you, and figure me out a screen and a set of meters
that will indicate an open band? We lose too much time feeling around anyhow,
and we're too apt to take one on the chin while we're doing it. Also, you ought
to make it so it'll shoot a jolt into the opening, while you're at it," said
Brandon. I don't know what kind of an audio system they've got, but there's no
use taking unnecessary chances. I've had 'Silk' Humphreys, the best fixer in
the business, working on him all day, and he'll be neutral before night.

"Second; drugs, vice, and so on. He could carry this load forever--but unless
he was very wrong, this load would change shortly. He tensed his muscles to
leap at Garlock, to find that he could not move. Plunging the vessel like a
bullet towards the grove in which he had left the Kondalian airship, he slowed
abruptly just in time to make a safe landing. As he stepped out upon Osnomian
soil, Loring landed the Earthly ship hardly less skillfully. Without a word the
captain loosened the helpless girl's grip upon the bracket and encased her in
the suit. As those tentacular arms stretched out toward the girl, Costigan
leaped. That airship is half full of metal-working machinery that can do
everything but talk.

"Aren't you going to kill them?" asked Sitar, amazement in every feature and a
puzzled expression in her splendid eyes. That's the gossip. Here's the novelty,
in equation 59.

"There, he's left his desk!" Costigan exclaimed after the conversation had
continued for almost an hour. K. , I'll see you about one o'clock. "I know. I
have drawn every picture I can think of with Isaacson in the driver's seat, but
none of them fit?" She paused, questioningly. I can handle your Operators and
get the job done. Olmstead does with his spare cash?"

"You'll find out, dearie, no doubt. " Molly's tone gave the words a meaning
slightly different from the semantic one of their arrangement. Then do the
same, visiting every other highly advanced planet we can locate.

Nerado, apparently as unfamiliar with the peculiar weapon as were the
Terrestrials, attacked cautiously; sending out far to the fore his murkily
impenetrable screens of red. Their detecting screens would locate it a thousand
million miles off in space, and they would ray it. Now and then they passed so
close to a star that it apparently moved rapidly, but for the most part the
silent sentinels stood, like distant mountain peaks to the travelers in an
express train, in the same position for many minutes. We'll never be parted
again," she whispered, and her own beloved violin had no sweeter tones than had
her voice. Four times the size--she'll be a bear-cat, Mart. As that dazzling
wall sprang into being, the sparkling green protection died from the walls of
the heptagon. After a rapid glance around to assure herself that she was not
being watched, she quickly searched the coat, bringing to light not one, but
two pistols, which she thrust into her pocket. Rovol then threw a switch, and a
hemisphere of flaming golden radiance surrounded the laboratory and extended
for miles upon all sides. He next set up an entirely new system of refractory
relief-points and installed additional ground-rods, sealed through the floor
and extending deep into the ground below, explaining as he worked. He was, and
would be for many centuries to come, a Watchman. And it was beautifully hidden;
even he, close as he must be, couldn't see it. Instead, without a break, the
words tripping over each other against his teeth: "_Chicago!_ _Johannesburg!_
_Europa!_ Act at will against heaviest craft left.

Willoughby then took him aboard the good ship _Virgin Queen_ and led him to his
cabin. And yes, you may order fresh, whole, not-canned hens' eggs.

Listening--straining to distinguish in the deafening roar of background noise
from the over-driven tubes any sign of voice or of signal:

Listening--while, millions upon millions of miles beyond even the prodigious
reach of those ultra-instruments, three human beings were even then sending out
into empty space an almost hopeless appeal for the help so desperately needed!









THE SPECIMENS ESCAPE



Knowing well that conversation with its fellows is one of the greatest needs of
any intelligent being, the Nevians had permitted the Terrestrial specimens to
retain possession of their ultra-beam communicators. "When the Service goes
after anything they get it, and when they get it it _stays_. I do not. "You
look perfectly stunning in this light. Any attempt to convince a mind of real
power that falsity is truth is illogical. "



The _Skylark_ dropped down into the midst of the fleet, which instantly turned
against her the full force of their giant guns and their immense ray batteries.
Even Seaton wouldn't have been alive now if he hadn't had a lot of luck at the
start. "

"Probably.

"I understand, sweetheart," he whispered. "

"But listen, Mr.

Dorothy gravely nodded assent. " This, too, was a thought. "That's a better job
than I _ever_ did!"

"Not at all, Master, as you know," Nito said. None of us likes the idea of
destroying it a bit better than you do. Born citizen, highest standing in
business and social circles. . . "

And upon that cheerless note the conference ended. " She flashed him a gamin
grin and they went on into the control room.

"Because of the acceleration they can stand. "The hexans have detected us and
our long range observers report that they are coming to meet us in force. "

The acolyte handed the pitcher to Trycie, who handed it to Tedric, who poured
its contents over the twin hearts, twin livers, and twin brains.

This act, according to Tedric's plan, was to end the program--but it didn't.

En route, Laro said--stiffly? Tentatively? Hilton could not fit an adverb to
the tone--"Master, have you then decided to destroy me? That is of course your
right. "He may be able to work his way. "

"Seaton? Yes, he's crazy--like a fox. "They hope to conclude all unfinished
business on a mutually satisfactory and profitable basis. That's about how much
ahead of us they probably are. "

"What next, Dick?"

"Now the real trouble begins. "Oh. Winged centipedes they were--centipedes
fully six feet long, hurling themselves along the ground and through the air in
furious hordes. From the flying globes emanated pale beams of force, at the
touch of which the Sedlor disappeared in puffs of vapor. Everything was
automatic, unless and until some robot or computer yelled for help. "

"Can you read my mind?" Hilton demanded. Take half the Royal Guard and a
century of bowmen. " Eddie did so. " Samms' tone was glum. For the Martian skin
is not like ours.

"It's not so good," he admitted frankly. Bearings agree, and distances check to
within a light-year, which is as close as we can hope to check on as small a
mass as a man. Well, that's that--nothing to do about it until after we get
there. "

"Before you do anything," said Margaret seriously, "I would like to know if you
really think there is a chance of defeating those monsters. As they approached,
Seaton shrugged one shoulder and his cigarette-case appeared in his hand.



In the meantime the slave had taken several pieces of apparatus from a cabinet
in the room and had placed them in his belt. Breadth and depth and scope of
imagination and of vision; yet almost incredible will-power and stamina and
resolve. . and then we fight about anything and everything. They weighed and
tested and analyzed and made copious notes; in shorthand and in the more
esoteric characters of symbolic logic.

Kinnison set out, deliberately this time, to mold his key Chief Line Inspectors
into just such a group as the Siberians already were. Since you left us you
have changed it radically; while we, of course, have not changed it at all.
What you're getting now is a lot more than you ever got before, and a _hell_ of
a lot more than none at all. The main trouble with this project, it seems to
me, is that nobody's building the ship. "

"Okay. Permissible, but not obligatory. "

"But it was assumed.

"_Fourth_ Officer? New rank, eh. I was thinking only of building the tube. "

"You will not! I hereby abolish that custom.

"Wrong? In what way?"

"In every way!" In the intensity of his emotion the smith spoke aloud.

"The cargo is unloaded, sir," the newcomer reported. Seaton lay in exactly the
same position, only the regular lifting of his powerful chest showing that he
was alive. Steered by wireless and carrying no crews, they were simply winged
bombs carrying thousands of pounds of terrific electrical explosive--enough to
kill the men inside the vessel by the concussion of the explosion, even should
the arenak armor be strong enough to withstand the blow. Though much faster
than the Osnomian vessels, they were slow beside the Skylark, and Seaton could
have dodged a few of them with ease.

"Why don't you play us some real music, Dottie?" asked Margaret, after a time.
The mouth can, and does. Practically nothing remained whole in the entire
compartment.

"Nothing much we can do here," Rodebush said finally, through his transmitter.
They simply flashed in, went inert at the four corners of an imaginary
tetrahedron, and threw everything they had--and they had plenty.

". "They're giving us a royal reception--let's acknowledge it right. However,
we're just about ready for them," he commented grimly, as he stared over her
shoulder into the communicator plate. I'm going to run a penstock up those
falls, and put in a turbine, driving a high-tension alternator. She'll carry a
two-hundred-pound bar--Zowie! Watch our smoke! And say, why wouldn't it be a
good idea to build an attractor--a thing like an object-compass, but mounting a
ten-pound bar instead of a needle, so that if they chase us in space we can
reach out and grab 'em? We might mount a machine-gun in each quadrant, shooting
X-plosive bullets, through pressure gaskets in the walls. Mentor didn't say so,
in so many words, but she made it perfectly clear that. "

"Huh?" Jill demanded, inelegantly.

"While they're coming up, I guess I'll pick up Perce and Miss Newton. "Upon
leaving Arisia, knowing vastly more than you do now, you will return to your
home planet, where you will take whatever steps you will then know to be
necessary. "

"I think. It was filled with swirling, gyrating bands and streamers of energy
so vivid and so solid as to resemble fabric; with wildly hurtling objects of
indescribable shapes and contours; with brilliantly flashing symbols which
Samms found, greatly to his surprise, made sense--not through the Rigellian's
mind, but through his own Lens:

"EAT TEEGMEE'S FOOD!"

"Advertising!" Samms' thought was a snort. "

"Stop thinking it was wrong, Tuly. "In your case, opportunity will be either
absolutely unlimited or zero, depending entirely upon yourself. Mine will
remain unlocked. I invite you to come in whenever you like, and assure you
formally that no such entry will be regarded as an invasion of privacy. That is
the result of our ancient civilization. Why mount it as though it weighed
twenty pounds?"

"To be safe. And any way I look at that concept, it's plain idiocy. Good
harvesting!"

For forty-eight Tellurian hours, taking time out only to sleep, Samms scanned
and surveyed the planet Trenco; and the more he studied it, the more
outrageously abnormal it became. " Her nostrils flared slightly; her fists
clenched--if possible--a fraction tighter; and, even in the distorted medium
they were using for speech, she could not subdue completely her quick change
into soaring, lilting buoyancy. "Great Cat! That's a purely Osnomian
war-gadget--kind of a battleship detector--shows that there's a boatload of bad
news around here somewhere. Grab the visiplates quick, folks," as he rang
Shiro's bell. "I'll take visiplate area one, dead ahead. "

And later, in a wingless craft flying toward the airfield, young Phryges broke
a long silence. You have enough of the dope to build a space-car from those
plans, haven't you?"

"Yes. I'm sure now that the drive is simply mechanical teleportation. And I
just simply couldn't _stand_ it!"

She threw herself into his arms, and he comforted her in the ages-old fashion
of man with maid. The Patrol's activities began hundreds or thousands or
millions or billions of miles away from Earth's metropolis.

Finally, only a scant few hundreds of yards from its goal, the protective
mirror was punctured and the freight of high explosive let go, with a silent,
but nevertheless terrific, detonation. Lieutenant-Commander Wagner, please, or
whoever else is handling clearances," Samms answered what he thought was to
have been her question.

"Oh, no, sir; you are cleared.

"This is little, compared to any regular planet or satellite or even to the
asteroids. We have heavy wraps, but we dislike to wear them so intensely that
we never subject ourselves to any cold. But in the eight solar systems with
which we are most familiar there are seven planets--I'm not counting
Valeria--which are very much like Earth in point of mass, size, climate,
atmosphere, and gravity. For instance, I think that you are the most perfectly
beautiful thing I ever saw; but no Venerian would think so. "

Even before the thought was issued the fused Elders had gone quietly and
smoothly to work. But _give_! What's the score? Where's Kolanides? Or rather,
what happened to him?"

"Dead.

Two facts were, however, unquestionable. Here they are.

After four hours a small car bearing the license number of a distant
state--which was found, by subsequent telegraphing, to be unknown to the
authorities of that state--drove under the porte-cochère, and the hidden
watcher saw DuQuesne, without the papers, step into it. Five seven. When you're
at the switch you'll feel my ray on your watch. This collar is made of
'arenak,' a synthetic metal which, once formed, cannot be altered by any usual
means. You see, to find out whether Laro is really an immovable object, I've
got to make like an irresistible force, which I ain't. "

"What difference does that make?" he asked, in honest surprise. Would you be
willing to sell us plans, or lease us ships.

"I certainly do. These four young Civilizations must be allowed to fall. They
as a class are called protelectricity, and bear the same relation to ordinary
electricity that electricity does to torque--both are pure energy, and they are
inter-convertible.

"It's funny," Belle said thoughtfully, "having this tremendous ship all to
ourselves. Everyone on the ground will have time enough to hide in the deep,
arenak-protected pits beneath the buildings, and you would be killed by the
invaders long before you could reach the palace. You'll be about fifty percent
overweight for a while. The _very_ toughest. But the big break was--you
remember the disappearance of that girls'-school cruise ship?"

"Of course. At first he was afraid of you, as were we all. Radiating from the
seven cardinal points of the building were short lanes leading to star-shaped
open plots, from which in turn branched out ways to other stellate areas; ways
reaching, after many such steps, to the towering inner walls of the metropolis.
The outer walls, still loftier and even more massive ramparts of sullen
gray-green metal, formed a seamless, jointless barrier against an utterly
indescribable foe; a barrier whose outer faces radiated constantly a searing,
coruscating green emanation.

Wherefore the undertaking was neither easy nor pleasant; and both Tellurians
were tremendously relieved when, the last pair picked up, they flashed the
starship back to Tellus and Delcamp, Fao, and the Thakerns 'ported themselves
aboard. Patroclus had never seen the Bithynian so buoyant. "Pallas Athene
covered you, like I asked her to. But by the red beak of Thoth and the sacred
Zaimph of Tanit, it gave me the horrors when you made that throw so quick and
missed it, and I went as crazy as the rest of them when you pulled the real
coup. I, personally, am going to cut his heart out. I have developed a
top-bracket lot of top-bracket stuff--originality, initiative, force, drive and
thrust," the Oman said precisely. "

"I have it," James said.

"I'm telling you as fast as I can. Vaneman," he said in a low voice, "we think
the Steel crowd is still camping on our trail. We are ready for them, with a
lot of stuff that they never heard of, but in case anything goes wrong, Martin
has written between the lines of this legal form, in invisible ink A-36,
exactly how to get possession of all our notes and plans, so that the company
can go ahead with everything. We detest land. "



As they went into the house Vaneman asked:

"What does the other side of the moon look like? I have always been curious
about it. "I _never_ want to see brains and livers and things swimming around
in nutrient solution if I can help it. "

All four became silent, thinking of the coming event of the day, until Crane
said:

"They have ministers here, I know, and I know something of their religion, but
my knowledge is rather vague. "I thought I could handle it. "

"Just as well, perhaps. "Two men to each Buford. "

"Oh, Ted!" She threw herself into his arms. "The point, youth, was well taken.
"

"Easy it is, Kinny. I can understand very little of what they are trying to
tell me. Mart, what would be the logical line of evolution when the planet has
become so old that all the land has been eroded to a level below that of the
ocean? You picked us out an old one, all right--so old that there's no land
left. Dot, three; Peg, four; Shiro, five. Look sharp!. I brought it along for
you to read at your leisure.

"Hand your tabulated data to Talmonides," the Faros directed. Thus, very
shortly, Virgilia Samms found herself, completely helpless and completely
unrecognizable, walking awkwardly out of the house between a businesslike
doctor and a solicitous nurse. Though surprised, they were not to be frightened
off, but with wild, shrill screams rushed to the attack. Figure it out, and
don't come at all until you can come loaded for bear; they're bad medicine.
Call us occasionally, to keep us informed as to when to expect you, but don't
call too often. "

They tested a hundred, under the normal tension of the spring, and three of
them broke. Samms directed his visibeam downward and sent along it an
exploring, questing thought. He opened the bleeder valves, then both air-lock
ports; the contaminated air was replaced by the ultra-hard vacuum of the
inter-planetary void. "

Damnation! There it was again! First "dexitroboping", and now this!

"One moment, please," Samms requested.

"You don't have to drive her as hard all the way, then, as you did last night?"

"No, I'm out of range of Seaton's instrument now, and we don't have to kill
ourselves. Costigan knew well and respected highly the Nevian
scientist-captain, and at his suggestion much time was spent in reenforcing the
super-ship's armament to the iron-driven limit of theoretical and mechanical
possibility. The silences grew longer, Clio's remarks became fewer, and soon
her long-lashed eyelids fell and her deep, regular breathing showed that she
was sound asleep. Kinnexa--_it had better be Kinnexa!_--would come to him.

How? By air? Along the road? Through the woods on foot? He had no way of
knowing--talking, even on a tight beam, was out of the question. "Altogether
too close for comfort. How shall we apply the power? One of us must stay awake,
or we'll go on as long as the bars last. How the adults get into space and
where they go," and she went on, in flashing thoughts, to explain in full
detail. "Nobody wires me up to anything I can't understand, and that machine is
too deep for me. This wasn't done on the spur of the moment, Jill; it was
planned--minutely. If I remember correctly, Damoiseau estimated its mass at
about three one-hundredths that of the Earth, which would make its surface
gravity about one-sixth. Samms realized then that he might, some day, learn
what a dexitroboper actually did and what the act of emmfozing actually was;
but that he very probably would not. Thus Samms had no idea that he was just
leaving Spokane Spaceport, Washington.

"Art hurt, sire?" Tedric asked anxiously as he and Sciro lifted Phagon to his
feet. Don't you want me to play for you a little?"

"Fine business, Dottie. I promised Dottie to go to bed not later than twelve,
if I have to quit right in the middle of an idea, and I told her that I was
coming out to see her every other evening and every Sunday. What chance has an
animal of escaping from a menagerie?"

"These animals, lots. It isn't a question of whether or not to destroy a
population--the only question is which population is to be destroyed. The only
reason he got away with it, is, that he has always been such an open-faced
talker, always telling everything he knew. Something funny about it, too--none
of them seem to have been touched, but the machinery of the suits seems to be
about half missing. "

"Tellurians?" came the voice of Barkovis from the speaker. Operation Zwilnik is
all set. Come in, Mase, and do your stuff--I'll see you later, aboard. "

"Some such indoctrination was to be expected, but I anticipate no trouble in
convincing you that you have been grossly misinformed in everything you have
been told concerning us; our aims, our ethics, our morals, and our standards of
conduct. A standard commercial job. Keller. "

"Damn your soul, Kinnison, come out here--I want to talk to you!" Keller
roared, and doors snapped open up and down the long corridor. "Vee-Two Gas! Get
tight!"

Writhing and twisting in his fierce struggle to keep his lungs from gulping in
a draft of that noxious atmosphere, and with the unconscious form of the girl
draped limply over his left arm, Costigan leaped toward the portal of the
nearest lifeboat. Orchestra instruments crashed to the floor and dancing
couples fell and sprawled inertly while the tortured First Officer swung the
door of the lifeboat open and dashed across the tiny room to the air-valves.
Throwing them wide open, he put his mouth to the orifice and let his laboring
lungs gasp their eager fill of the cold blast roaring from the tanks. The glare
of the searchlight was snuffed out and he saw a flashing light spell out in
dots and dashes:

"Can you read Morse?"

"Yes," he signalled back. . . . . . . . "

"Shut up, Jane! They won't hurt us any more than they have already; it's
psychologically impossible. I see--you were going out there and be
slaughtered?" He flushed, but made no reply. "

"Well, then," said the practical Crane. "Resignation not accepted. You're
_Fired_! Dishonorably discharged--blacklisted everywhere--you'll _never_ get
another job--_anywhere_! And here's your slip, too!" Miss Foster was very fast
on the machines. . with the Lens perhaps telephones are superfluous? I'll try
it. You physicists are peculiar freaks--where we ordinary mortals see actual,
solid, heavy objects, you see only empty space with a few electrons and things
floating around in it; and yet where we see only empty space, you can see
things 'potentially' that may never exist at all. What is it?"

"It is that you, Solarian Councillor Samms, should go to Arisia as soon as
possible. . . . be. When the lid opens, go into a full-power dive, beam
Artomenes--if I had a second before they blanketed my wave--and meet their
rocket head-on in their own launching-tube. Everything goes in, this time. But
suddenly "BRAHMS!" rang out, with four voices in absolute unison; followed a
moment later by Lopresto's stentorian "NOW!"

It was a very good thing that Deston had had ample warning, for he was indeed
competing out of his class. The fortress was literally ringed about with the
shattered remnants of airships, and the riddled hulls of more than a few of
those mighty globular cruisers of the void bore mute testimony to the
deadliness and efficiency of the warfare of the invaders. In other words,
Cloud's figuring had been close--very close. I'm going to check up, and argue
with them about it as we pass. And I just simply couldn't _stand_ it!"

She threw herself into his arms, and he comforted her in the ages-old fashion
of man with maid. "

"And they _aren't_!" blazed Commander Samuel Bryant (Electronics). After
assuring themselves that everything combustible had been removed, the two
scientists put on under their helmets, goggles whose protecting lenses could be
built up to any desired thickness. I'm a walking storehouse of junk of all
kinds, so that if occasion arises I can put on a real exhibition. Shoot. "

"Now, you sheet-iron bucket of nuts and bolts, _jump_!" and Garlock snapped the
red switch. "I'm going to burst this unjustifiable fad for platinum jewelry so
wide open that it'll never recover, and make platinum again available for its
proper uses, in laboratories and in the industries. Zerexi shouldn't have gone
into a knot so early against such a fast man. "

"Oh, I don't know," argued Kromodeor. "And you won't. Lord Llosir is clean: all
our temples are foul in every stone and timber. "

"At earliest dawn take two centuries of axemen and one century of bowmen, with
the wagonload of wood-workers' supplies about which some of you have wondered.
"You know, Steve. "

Under the fierce blast of her projectors the vessel leaped ahead, and time
after time, as Rodebush hurled her mass upon tractor beam or pressor, the
engineers sought in vain for any sign of weakness. You wouldn't know about room
service, either, then--better scan that tape before you go to sleep
tonight--what'll you have in the line of a drink to while away enough time so
she will know we've been playing games?"

"Ginger ale, please. My father the king has known for long what you are; he
should have ennobled you long since. Rome will go on by momentum--outwardly,
will even appear to grow--for a few generations, but what Nero will do can
never be undone. "

"Good. "It's the adult form that hatches; something so different they don't
even recognize it. How about calling it the 'Galactic Service'? Applicable to
either war or peace. "

"We were still falling pretty fast. We can get you any kind of plane you want
in an hour, and Perkins can find a man of that description who would be glad to
have a dream at that price. Everything of any importance, including all of your
personal effects, has already been moved. Donning a water-proof coverall, he
slid through a flexible valve into his acceleration-tank and waited.

A siren yelled briefly.

"Nix. " With a sick, cold certainty Jill knew that this conversation was for
the benefit of the doorman and the hackers, and that it would stand up under
any examination. We have very little information to guide us in answering that
question. "



At this paralyzing news, Dorothy's face turned white and Margaret Spencer
quietly fainted in her seat. I wish you could do it to me. Here I am. It is,
you will observe, in an insulated container, and does not glow. For more than
five thousand years our instruments have been set to detect the vibrations
which would herald the advent of the user of that metal.

"But enough of that, we'll have plenty of grief of our own right here. "It is
evident, of course, that I cannot qualify; nor do I know anyone personally who
can. . " Jill was surprised anew.

"Couldn't," Kinnison insisted. Moving to the accompaniment of strange martial
music from concealed instruments, the two parties approached each other,
meeting at the raised platform or pulpit where Karbix Tarnan, a handsome,
stately, middle-aged man who carried easily his hundred and fifty karkamo of
age, awaited them. Clio sobbed in relief and Costigan, one arm around her,
sighed hugely.

"Oh, Conway, this is ghastly! It's. Hence, when the minions of Sarpedion next
appeared, armored this time in the heaviest and best iron they had and all set
to overwhelm him by sheer weight of numbers, he was completely ready.

The crowd, already frantic, had gone stark mad at the blow. Hilton worried. The
multi-mind visited relatives of all eight, but could not make intelligible
contact. Swift as they were, the monster covered three feet to their one.

"We can't stand for anything like that," cried Seaton, as he threw on the power
and the Skylark leaped ahead. "That is a peculiar pose you are holding now.
North America would be standing alone. "

"Of course.



Loring was then instructed in the simple navigation of the ship of space, and
thereafter the two men took their regular shifts at the controls. Keeping his
projector upon the pirate, he seized the first club to hand--a long, slender
pedestal of metal--launched himself past the pirate chief. With all the
momentum of his mass and velocity and all the power of his good right arm he
swung the bar at the pirate's head. That zone is immense, man--terrific--its
possibilities are unthinkable--and I'm so cussed dumb that I can't find out how
to use it intelligently--can't use it at all, for that matter. "A concise and
accurate summation.

Glass in hand, Herkimer indicated a nearby doorway. Who else in the three
worlds could possibly call him 'Sammy?' You are hard, of course, but you must
be so--and I never did like soft men, anyway. She's posted notices all over it
and is guarding it with a pistol. Also, she is and always will be scared half
to death of you--she thinks you're some kind of robot. Bound to hit some
humans. The frightful planes and beams of immeasurable power simply spent
themselves harmlessly against those sparklingly radiant green walls--seemingly
as absorbent to energy as a sponge is to water, since the eye could not detect
any change in the appearance of the screens, under even the fiercest blasts of
the hexan projectors. His first beam, directed well forward, well ahead of the
precious cargo, should have wrought the same havoc against screens and
wall-shields and structure as a white-hot poker would against a pat of
luke-warm butter. One was watching the instruments, the others scanned narrowly
the immense, swelling curve of the ship's belly, the water upon which his
vessel was to land, and the floating dock to which it was to be moored. He
noticed as he reached her, that Crane had removed his helmet and was
approaching the other girl. He exchanged his goggles for a thicker, darker,
heavier pair.

And then disaster struck; suddenly, paralyzingly, as mine disasters do. "Don't
let the debt worry you any. " Virgilia was actually there with him; inside his
own mind; in closer touch with him than she had ever before been. If they had
missed us at all, they would have had us long ago, and with all the damage we
did with those projectors they won't be surprised at one piece being missing--I
imagine they lost a good many. "

Nerado had been in touch with the scientists of his city; he had been
instructing them in the construction of converters and generators of such
weight and power that they could crush even the defenses of the super-ship.
Placing them upon the white sward, he backed away, motioning the two visitors
to pick them up. Perspiration streamed from him, his mighty muscles stood out
in ridges visible even under the heavy leather of his coat, his lips parted in
a snarl over his locked teeth as he threw every ounce of his wonderful body
into an effort to force his right hand up to the switch. His hand approached it
slowly--closed over it and pulled it out. His eyes, hard and lifeless, stared
unseeingly past the small, three-dimensional block portrait of all that had
made life worth living.

"However, he could have, and probably has got, a capsule spy-ray detector,"
Jack offered, presently. Behind him there stood four other old men. At the apex
of the cone, protected by all the other vessels of the formation and in best
position to direct the battle, was the flagship. Head thrown back, hard blue
eyes keenly alert, sword-arm rock-steady he stood there, poised and ready.
Beautifully poised, upon the balls of both feet; supremely ready to throw into
action every inch of his six-feet-four, every pound of his two-hundred-plus of
hard meat, gristle, and bone. So standing, the smith stared motionlessly at the
shimmering, almost invisible thing hanging motionless in the air of his room,
and at its equally tenuous occupant. The third of the mad flurry of swordcuts,
only partially deflected by the sword which Fermius could only then get into
play, sheared down and a red, a green, and a white plume floated toward the
ground. And don't pull your punches. Samms squared his shoulders unconsciously;
and slowly, grimly, made his way back to his private office.

"This where we're going to land?" he asked, indifferently. "I'll pick those
jaspers off with a pencil and then stand off the bunch that's coming while you
rub out the rest of that crew there and drag Bradley back here. _That'll_ learn
ya!"



Theodora and Hilton did have their breakfast _a deux_--but she did not realize
until afterward that he had not answered her question as to what he had done to
her Bill.

As has been said, Hilton had made it a prime factor of his job to become
thoroughly well acquainted with every member of his staff. Since our recorded
history goes back some tens of thousands of Saturnian years, and since in that
long period there has been no measurable change in us, few of us have believed
in the legends at all.

The Navy had torn fifteen of the Oman warships practically to pieces,
installing Terran detectors and trying to learn how to operate Oman machinery
and armament. How big would an island have to be for us to see it from here?"

"So much depends upon the contour and nature of the island, that it is hard to
say. . I didn't quite believe it until now, but if. Good-night, children. I
wish you success, Dick," as he turned away. It is apparently focused at
infinity, as near-by objects are not affected. But the goon did not see the
Patrolman as a friend. "

"I'm glad you did, big fellow--once in a lifetime is good for the soul.
Goodbye," and heartless and bloodthirsty Osnomian though she was, Sitar had
gone to join the two Terrestrial women.

"I didn't want to say much before the girls, but I want to check a couple of
ideas with you two. " Quickly the dread report came back. Your own Regulations
expressly forbid extrapolation beyond or interpolation within a directive. To
do so safely you must pass the last meteorological station, M14, on schedule
time plus or minus five seconds, at scheduled velocity plus or minus ten
meters, with exactly the given negative acceleration of 981. Herkimer, in spite
of advice and orders, had probably got rough with the girl, and Samms' mob had
rubbed him out. Served him right.

"I have no criticism of any phase of your work. So was her spectacularly filled
halter. Operation Bullfinch was clicking; on schedule to the second. Middle
distance. Uh-uh. He didn't like it any better now than he had before, even
though some of the Big Brains of Staff thought it the ideal solution. And at
the _Quartette's_ tremendous climax she, scarcely trying to stifle a sob,
pulled his hand down and hugged it fiercely, the heel of his hand pressing hard
against her half-bare, firm, warm breast. . Please put me on Newton, in the
main office. We ourselves have not yet reached that stage, and we are perhaps
millions of years older than you. "

"What a concept! What stupendous minds! But such immense distances, sir.

"Just a second.

"That is perhaps possible," the Inspector agreed, equably enough. Samms was
again called into the control room, to see that the ship was approaching a
three-sun solar system. What they were thinking of Arisia's Lens cannot be
expressed in words. From the monstrous shoulders there rose a rather long and
very flexible, yet massive and columnar neck, supporting a head neither human
nor bestial--a head utterly unknown to Terrestrial history or experience. But
the Earth-men saw with surprise that the main attack was not being directed at
the dome; that only an occasional ray was thrown against it in order to make
the defenders keep their screens up continuously. . . . . . " Garlock paused in
thought. "

"You just think you do. "That must have been a terrific job. Since it is not
your custom, it is probable that the justices would waive the ruling,
especially since everyone must be examined by a jury of his own or a superior
rank, so that only one man, my father alone, could examine you. But since we
know nothing of their habits or customs, it will be best to give them all
possible freedom compatible with safety. That operation was _planned_. It would
take months, perhaps years, and would be devilishly uncertain, to boot. "

"But it's implicit. He baffles me, too. "But I ain't leaving this ditch right
now--sounds mighty hot out there!"

"You said it, brother.

"Its strength. This isn't. . . . " Her voice ceased as Roger broke the
ether-wall of her apartment and walked toward the divan, upon which she
crouched in wide-eyed, helpless, trembling terror. The Mayfield was running. .
"

"That's a _hell_ of a picture!" James broke in savagely.

"The point is, what can we do about it?" Kincaid asked.

"Not unless I have to," he replied, composedly. He wormed his way to a certain
boulder. "

"Yes, and the wrong kind would make it.

"Well, if they don't tax it it'll be the first thing in history that isn't.
Crane," he stated. "He should recover consciousness in an hour or so. "I don't
know what made me act so stupid. Everything he's got, at full emergency blast.
"

"Can you read my mind?" Hilton demanded. Did you think I had nerve enough to do
it without help?"

Seaton turned and opened the door. " Deston thought for a moment. "Let's finish
it up and shoot a little juice through it, just to try it out. Try your hand on
me. You or the sex-flaunting twins or Bev Bell or Stella the Henna. Then, with
that much done, it'll be up to you to provide, since I'll have to work tooth
and nail at the forges.

"Now I know enough about it to do a good job on the bar," he decided, and brick
after brick of alloy was fused into the crack, until only a smoothly rounded
bulge betrayed that a break had ever existed in that mighty rod of metal. .
well, we're close enough, I guess. "

"Well, I'll never tackle him with heat.

"You can say _that_ again!" her boss gloated. And while you're changing suits
you'd better put on some stuff I've got here--Service Special phones and
detectors. . " he broke off, realizing that the two races had no thought in
common in the measure of time. Here's hoping nothing gives away!"

The _Sirius_, almost against the flaming screens of the Jovian, and both
vessels very close to the surface of the satellite, Brandon tested the power
leads briefly, adjusted dials and coils, then touched the button which actuated
the relays--relays which in turn drove home the gigantic switches that launched
a fearsome and as yet untried weapon. If I do the job they'll have their
starship in a few weeks. As for arguing with you, I'm all done for the moment.
Shutting the door, he opened an auxiliary air-tank, adjusting the gauge to one
atmosphere as he did so. Soon she drew a spasmodic breath, choking and
coughing, and he again changed the gaseous stream to one of pure air, speaking
urgently as she showed signs of returning consciousness. He saw DuQuesne, with
a roll of papers under his arm, emerge from under the bridge just in time to
leap aboard the automobile, which slowed down only enough to enable him to
board it in safety. It means building the first interplanetary vessel, you
know. If she knew he was a millionaire she would be scared to death--not of
him, of course, but because she would think that he would think that she was
chasing him, and then of course he would think that she was, see? As it is, she
acts perfectly natural, and so does he. "

Seaton reduced the force acting upon the animal until just enough was left to
keep the attractor upon it, and it again dived into the swamp. "Eff-ex
six--nineteen. This it?"

"Check. You may have observed that the statuary is very old. The only thing we
know is that they've got us beat a hundred ways, and we've got to act
accordingly. Tractors and pressors leaped from ship to ship, binding the whole
myriad of hitherto discrete units into a single structure as solid, even
comparatively as to size, as a cantilever bridge. And instead of remaining
quiescent, waiting to be attacked, the cylinder flashed forward, inertialess,
at maximum blast. For Cloud's vague forebodings were materialized, and more;
the staggeringly immense energy of the vortex merged with that of the
detonating duodec to form an utterly incomprehensible whole. 'Port it to the
exact place you want it to detonate. Reconvert and release instantaneously.
One-hundred-percent-conversion atomic bomb, tailored exactly to fit the job.
Very effective. Roger issued orders; and waited; and thought more and more
intensely upon one point which remained obscure--why, when the strangers
themselves destroyed Triplanetary's fleet, had Roger been unable to use his
most potent weapons against that fleet?

Thus, then, for the first time in Triplanetary's history, the forces of law and
order joined hands with those of piracy and banditry against a common foe.
Think you can stall him off and keep him interested for about fifteen minutes?"

"I'm sure I can--I'll do _anything_ to help us, or you, get away from this
horrible.

"Think so? I _know_ so!" replied Stevens, positively. And practically all of
its frightful radiation lies in those octaves of the spectrum which are
invisible to the human eye.

Like fire, only worse, intra-atomic energy was a good servant, but a terrible
master. The Earth appeared as a great, softly shining, greenish half-moon, with
parts of its surface obscured by fleecy wisps of cloud, and with its two
gleaming ice-caps making of its poles two brilliant areas of white. And waited.
I think that he has finally traced that dope line. There's only one thing to
do.

"All x with me, Nadia," he answered, keeping out of his voice all signs of the
tenderness he felt for her, and of his very real admiration for her
straightforward conduct in a terrifying situation. There's no need of keeping
up this farce of your being slaves as long as we're alone, is there, Dunark?"

"No, but at the first sound of the gong announcing a visitor we must be in our
places. Our orders are to get back there at maximum, and you know what that
means aboard the _Sliver_. "'

"What d'you mean 'if the next conjunction is _allowed_ to occur?'" interjected
Seaton. "Nobody can stop it. Altruism is beautiful in theory, but it has never
been known to work in practice. I will pay a tremendous price--any price within
reason or possibility--for the Lens; but I will have to know what that price is
to be. "

"Uh-uh. I'm shooting at Brandon, and he's never there for more than a week or
two at a stretch. . But damn it, there ought to be _some_ way to. Sirius blazed
in blue-white splendor, dominating the lesser members of his constellation, a
minute but intensely brilliant diamond upon a field of black velvet--his
refulgence unmarred by any trace of scintillation or distortion.

As Seaton slowly shifted the field of vision, angling toward and across the
celestial equator and the ecliptic, they beheld in turn mighty Rigel; The Belt,
headed by dazzlingly brilliant-white Delta-Orionis; red Betelguese; storied
Aldebaran, the friend of mariners; and the astronomically constant Pleiades.

"Daylight in the swamp, you sleeper!" she exclaimed. Of Alphacent. There is no
more danger in this trip than there is in one to Mars. Inoffensive, naive,
innocent, he was surprised beyond measure at their reception of his friendly
greeting; but in the instant before closing his mind to their vicious attacks,
he learned the foregoing facts concerning them.

The fused mind of the Elders of Arisia, however, was not surprised. I invite
you to come into my vessel, unarmed and alone, for a conference. Know you,
American, that we supermen of the Fenachrone are as far above any of the other
and lesser breeds of beings who spawn in their millions in their countless
myriads of races upon the numberless planets of the Universe as you are above
the inert metal from which this, your ship, was built. I know that you had
atomic bombs, with which to obliterate this assemblage and this entire area. "

"WHAT? Of all the damned. "I can call anybody in here, any time, you know. Just
to think of human beings, even such cold-blooded ones as those over there,
living upon such a horrible moon and _liking_ it, gives me the blue shivers!"

"It's pretty bleak, no fooling," he admitted, and peered through the eyepiece
of the visiray telescope, studying minutely the forbidding surface of the
satellite they were so rapidly approaching. A lot of good men are studying this
thing of direct vision, though, and it won't be long before we have a system
that will really work. "

"Not difficult, exactly.

"Preposterous, hell," Roderick Kinnison's thought was still coldly level; only
the fact that he was beginning to use non-ballroom language revealed any sign
of the strain he was under. Color was rampant.



Hair--or lack of it--was also an individual and highly variant matter. "
Brandon suggested in the common Interplanetarian tongue. Nor will your duties
be onerous; being only to see to it that your maidens keep my hearth clean and
my statue bright. And his shield wouldn't make patches for yours. Even wars are
becoming a more dangerous plaything for nations of our world--to say nothing of
other possible enemies from other parts of our universe. Everybody's full of
joy and gratitude and stuff--as well as information. And we managed to pry
ourselves loose without waking you two trumpet-of-doom sleepers up. It is
certainty. Nor are we gladiators alone in this. His only care, apparently, was
to avoid interference with the fishermen; his under-water jaunts were long,
even for a Venerian, and he entered and left the water as smoothly as only a
Venerian--or a seal--could. James shot the _Pleiades_ up to within a thousand
miles or so of the moon. This woman blowing her top was no Brownie Montandon
any of them knew. And I mean _immutable_, gentlemen. After telling them all
this and watching them suffer, they put a machine on their heads and they
dropped dead. That will bring him, and Crane will consent. One set of facts
says there was a leak, which occurred between two and a half and three minutes
before the signal was given. He gave the body a shove, watched it roll down the
slope. I say beat it while we're all in one piece. Look at your watch. Could
there be a finer world upon which to found a new race? When we decided to cut
loose from the _Arcturus_ I told you that I was with you all the way, and now
I'll repeat it, with a lot more meaning. Earth technology was supreme
throughout all known space; of Earth technologists the North Americans were,
and always had been, tops. Grant that the Black Fleet was, basically, North
American. Adlington himself was several months away from a world-wrecker,
unless he could put one a hundred miles down before detonation, which simply
was not feasible. He turned to Samms. He then wrenched off the helmet and cast
the whole suit aside, revealing the enemy officer, clad in a tunic of scarlet
silk. When the copper refused to act as it had the night before they all took
the snap judgment that he had suffered an attack of temporary insanity, and
that the solution was worthless. "

"You chirped it, boss. "

"Exactly. Primes seem to be such _nice_ people. " James rolled his eyes upward
and steepled his hands. Entlore, we can all 'port to your office and save
calling staff cars. "

"And cause a revolution?" Entlore laughed. The Lensmen, noticing that the place
was neatly kept and meticulously clean, sat down and resumed their discussion
of two extremely unusual infants. After a time he noted that the color had gone
down to yellow and he thrilled with exultation, knowing that he had so reduced
the numbers of the enemy fleet that their wave-generators could no longer
overcome his refrigerators. They were authorized by Crane to offer a reward of
one million dollars for information leading to the arrest and conviction of the
murderer.

"Hell's jets!" Deston exclaimed. Intelligible conversation was, of course,
impossible, but King soon realized that the visitors were not enemies. At their
pantomimed suggestion he put on a space-suit and wafted himself over to the
airlock of the Callistonian warplane. The two combatants then touched wing tips
in salute and flew away together, over the heads of the crowd; plunging into a
doorway and disappearing as the two officers uncoiled from their "seats" and
wriggled out into the corridor. Then boys and girls alike move to the Country
of Youth, where they spend another twenty-five years. "

"Dunark of Osnome is already informed as to what Osnome is to do. They heard
Margaret suggest that Dorothy play some "real music," and heard Seaton's
comments upon the quartette. I'll tell you when. I can't say I'm sorry that he
got away, though. . . excuse me, sir. "

"No offense taken, sir. We're all pulling for you," Sawtelle said. "

Everything ready and thoroughly tested, and stream of power flowing into the
_Arcturus_ from the cosmic receptors of her sister ship, the passengers and
their new possessions were moved into their former quarters.

"You mean, dear, that we're. This is going to be real work, girl--no fooling.
At each intersection there are four stand pipes and automatic swim-counters
that regulate the volume of water and the number of tubes in use.

"Now you may try your radio," Adams said. The best their Middlemarch horses
could do in the way of speed was a lumbering canter, but their tremendous
masses--a Middlemarch warhorse was not considered worth saving unless he
weighed at least one long ton--added to the weight of man and armor each bore,
gave them momentum starkly irresistible. The two victims were hustled aboard
and the space-ship, surrounded now by full-coverage screen, took off.

"Hi, men!" Nadia Stevens and Verna Pickering, arms around each other's waists,
entered the room and saluted the group gaily before they became a part of it.
"Two hours, more or less. "

"Oh, Ted!" She threw herself into his arms. Thus, _in loco parentis_, we would
be derelict indeed if we refused to act. Jones was whisked out to the uranium
ship and was shown to his cabin. "

"So you know?"

"Yes. She'd make me dress for dinner. Besides, she thinks the whole galaxy is
fairly crawling with double-Primes. "

"He's cooking one right now, I'll bet a hat," Seaton put in, and Crane added:

"If you are sure that you have no objections, Miss Spencer, we might go below,
where we can have it dark, and all three of us see what we can make of the
stargazing. Then she changed to reveries and soft, plaintive melodies. How's
that?"

"All right. "



They took their places, and Seaton felt the vessel slow down in its horrible
fall as DuQuesne threw his lever into the first notch. "Is there a doctor
here?"

There was; and, after being "frisked" for weapons, he went busily to work. "To
narrow it still further, Triplanetarian. Too small a charge scatters it around,
in vortices which, while much smaller than the original, are still large enough
to be self-sustaining. The problem was handed to Siberia. She seemed--quieter?
Softer? More subdued? No, definitely.











Since everyone, including the ebullient ComOff, slept late the following
morning, they all had brunch instead of breakfast and lunch. How does _that_
fit into your theory?"

"It doesn't. "

"That's right.

"Deny it? No. "Driving converters and projectors!"

The first assistant scanned his meters narrowly as he swung a multi-point
switch in a flashing arc. "Converter efficiency 100, projector reactivity 100;
on each of numbers one to forty-five inclusive. All x. Therefore, it is not a
hexan--it may be one of those strange creatures of the satellites, who are, of
course, perfectly harmless. "

"Well," he said, finally, "I'd better get busy, then--there's a lot to do
before we can start. "

"Good God!" That news, to Clancy, was informative enough. To that end each
individual Strett had to become invulnerable and immortal.

The visitors from the Country of Youth, however, locked arms and sprang to
surround the four Terrestrials, crying, "Let's do a group dive!"

"I don't believe that I can swim well enough to enjoy what's coming," whispered
Margaret to Crane, and they slipped into the pool and turned around to watch.
Nevertheless, he was a very busy man. When they were ready to go to sleep,
Temple said:

"Drat it, those Omans _still_ want to come in and sleep with us. . . " Lola
paused, flushing in embarrassment. Centuries. . "

"Shut up, Jane! They won't hurt us any more than they have already; it's
psychologically impossible. "

"The man died during examination. . say, Captain, will you please have the
Chief Electrician and a couple of radio men come in here?"

They came, and for hours, while the other ultra-wave men searched the
apparently empty ether with their ineffective beams, the three technical
experts and the erstwhile Quartermaster's clerk labored upon a huge and complex
ultra-wave projector--the three blindly and with doubtful questions; the one
with sure knowledge at least of what he was trying to do. Finally the thing was
done, the crude, but efficient graduated circles were set, and the tubes glowed
redly as their massed output drove into a tight beam of ultra-vibration.

"Sir, neither I nor this vessel had anything to do with the destruction of your
warship. "The Gaul is done--Patroclus all but had him there!"

"One thousand, you!" came another challenge. I _still_ don't like it. I think
I'll turn in my badge--I've cocked our perfect curve already, before we got to
the first check-station!" His hands moved toward the controls, to correct their
course and acceleration. Well, when they located me--probably with an automatic
Osnomian ray-detector--and heated me red-hot while I was still better than two
hundred miles up, I knew then and there that they had us stopped; that there
was nothing we could do except go back to my plan, abandon the abduction idea,
and eventually kill them all. " Jack killed the driving blasts, but not the
Bergenholm; the inertialess vessel stopped instantaneously in open space. "When
it comes to playboys like this one, I've got millions and skillions and
whillions of ohms of resistance. . . . " His thought expired on a wondering,
confused note.

Her whole body was tense and strained. "I can't? Watch me!" She grinned up at
him, her eyes still dancing. Can't you delouse your signal? Whittle the stuff
down to our size?"

"W-e-l-l-," the scientist looked hurt, but did consent to forego the high math.
However, after we get this Fenachrone mess cleaned up we'll have to do just
that little thing, won't we, Mart? As that intellectual guy said while he was
insisting upon dematerializing us, 'Science demands it. One of our men was in
the _Hyperion_, managed to stay alive, and has been sending data. . . . . . I'd
say here, _under_ the Hill. Are you or aren't you?"

"I'll be damned if I know. "

"You isolate a little energy in the Op field, remembering of course, that
you're handling a hundred thousand gunts. Do you others agree? Vice-Admiral
Corander?"

"Yes. "

He staggered mentally under the shock of encountering practically
simultaneously so many minds, but rallied strongly and went on, via Lens:

"My first message is not to you, my fellow Cosmocrats, nor to you, my fellow
dwellers on Earth, nor even to you, my fellow adherents to Civilization; but to
THE ENEMY. He will go camping--he often does. Carefully he transferred to the
vessel the motley assortment of containers of Vee-Two, and after a quick
check-up to make sure that he had overlooked nothing, he shot his craft
straight up into the air. Then only did he close his ultra-wave circuits and
speak. Then he spoke--not softly, but in parade-ground tones audible to
everyone present. As for the wall, it happened to be in the way of the
thought-waves I hurled against your guards--consequently it was demolished. . "

"Oh, no, you must not do that. Read the last phrase!"

"Oh, sure--'mush' is right," and with no perceptible break the signals again
became intelligible. As for those on the _Perseus_, no two of them will tell
the same story and not one of them has even the remotest idea of what the real
story is. As the exit was approached, the tunnel described a long vertical
curve, so that when the opening into the shaft of the crater was reached and
the undercarriage was automatically detached, the vessel was projected almost
vertically upward. "

"Now just what could you offer any _man_ to make him join your outfit?"
demanded Costigan, venomously.

"We'll blow them out of space, Mr. "Go on wool-gathering like this and your man
will go hungry--and he'll break you right off at the ankles!" She became again
the huntress, and soon saw an animal browsing steadily along the base of a
hill. It was a six-legged, deer-like creature, much larger than anything she
had as yet seen. Four of its five rooms were merely adjuncts to its tremendous
living-room. Presently four more corpses lay still and Stevens, with his, to
them incredible, earthly strength, was once more upon his feet in spite of
their utmost efforts to pinion his mighty limbs, and was again swinging his
devastating weapon. Half their force lying upon the field, wiped out by a
small, but invincible and apparently invulnerable being, the remainder broke
and ran, pursued by Stevens to the point where the red monsters had first
halted. The men on duty--the normal force, that is--would be doubly careful for
a time. The scream of tortured tires and the crescendo bellowing of the engine
combined to form an uproar which, amplified by and reverberating within the
resonant shell of metal, threatened to addle the very brain inside the
Lensman's skull. . . . . . . . . . . I. We will not be able to oversee the
work, that is a drawback. In that cavern, instructed and aided by some of us,
you will build a rocket vessel--no rays can be used because of the hexans--in
which you will be able to travel to a region close enough to your earth so that
you can call for help. "

"Suppose there's a Jovian space-ship out there somewhere that intercepts our
beams. I will also have prepared some kind of a space-suit in which he can be
brought from his vessel to ours," and the surgeon took the measurements and
went to see that the "operating table" and suit were made ready for Kromodeor,
the sorely wounded Vorkul. . . . . m. " Samms inhaled a mouthful of smoke and
exhaled it slowly; watched it dissipate in the air. "But she could have helped
it along; and she's all set to take every possible advantage of the situation
thus created. If you should change your mind, any time you really want to. How
do you want it?"

Fao was shocked as she had never been shocked before. Not off the cuff. "

"But you haven't tested _me_!" Belle said.

"All right, Dicky," she replied, the color flowing back into her cheeks. You
have not had your sixteen hours, but everything will be regular from now on.
Petrine?"

"Not 'practically', we are Petrinos all. The 'teachers' were all in the Center.

For miles beyond that edge, and as deep under it as frightful rays and enormous
charges of explosive copper could penetrate, the ground was one seething,
flaming volcano of molten and incandescent lava; lava constantly being
volatilized by the unimaginable heat of those rays and being hurled for miles
in all directions by the inconceivable power of those explosive copper
projectiles--the heaviest projectiles that could be used without endangering
the planet itself--being directed under the exposed edge of that unbreakable
apron, which was in actuality anchored to the solid core of the planet itself;
lava flowing into and filling up the vast craters caused by the explosions.

"Only of how Martin is going to be paid what we owe him," she answered
teasingly. "Those torpedoes went home, fast. But we can do nothing until the
steel arrives, and with the guard Prescott has here now we are safe enough. You
teach a few courses. I would like to know your reasons for thinking that such a
race exists. But that weight! One hundred twenty thousand _metric
tons_--incredible! Are you _sure_ of that figure?"

"Definitely. The "Forlorn Hope" leaped out of the canyon and high into the air
over the open meadow, just as the six great projectiles crashed into the ground
upon the spot which, an instant before, she had occupied.

After the meal, which was a happy one, taking the nature of a celebration in
honor of the return of the captives, DuQuesne went directly to his room while
the others spent the time until the zero hour in strolling about the splendid
grounds, always escorted by many guards. "

The Gray Lensman took the document, glanced at it, and slowly, meticulously,
tore it into sixteen equal pieces.

"Wonderful!" Tedric exclaimed. Along the detector line a visibeam sped, and
Costigan's face hardened as he saw the unmistakable outline of Nerado's
interstellar cruiser, far behind them. Through the Gate, the guards saluting
smartly as the bug raced past them. As Loring held the steel vessel close to
the stranger, DuQuesne leaped lightly through the open door into the interior.
Dig out that directive and tear it down. Draw that line Bill talked about. "

"Can do, boss. " Birkenfeld chose his words with care.

"Stick around, folks. . . that I can't stand. The officers had plenty to do;
operating the whole ship and rebuilding the mechanisms that were operating on
jury rigging or on straight "bread-board" hookups. As several of his men,
braver than the others, lifted their peculiar rifles, Seaton drew and fired in
one incredibly swift motion, the X-plosive bullet obliterating the entire group
of men and demolishing that end of the palace. I do not need, I do not want, _I
will not have_ any such. Then, ready to act, we will do at once whatever seems
called for by the situation then obtaining.

He then leaped back to his companion. An analytical mind," he said, evenly,
and--apparently--irrelevantly. You already have observed that we are of the
same race as those who destroyed your vessel, and have assumed that we are with
them. With their drives they can match our velocity and still make the drop
direct. "

The young scientist was called in, and was introduced to the Commissioner. "And
what have they got that makes them so tough?"

"Nothing. But tell me, Storm, please, that you won't invite it.

Jill would have screamed, then, and pointed; but she had time to do neither.

The casing disappeared, and the yielding porous lining. "It looks as though
we're getting wherever it is we're going. "Why, Pops Kinnison would. "His
fiancee was aboard the _Arcturus_, and when they found out how long we would
have to be here, they very sensibly decided not to wait. "

"Were there any others?" demanded Nadia, who, standing between Stevens and her
father, had been an interested listener. It's funny, too. What to do? It's
getting darker than a hat, and we're a long way from home. It is almost pure
crystallized energy. "



Silence ensued, and Seaton advanced his lever to the limit of his ability to
retain consciousness. They certainly are on Venus, and they once were on Mars.

Kinnison set out, deliberately this time, to mold his key Chief Line Inspectors
into just such a group as the Siberians already were. It is much more difficult
to master, and in times of stress the muscles revert involuntarily and
embarrassingly to their wonted gravity-field techniques. Then, fused,
volatilized, flaming incandescent throughout the length, breadth, and height of
a dwelling, that dwelling's existence thereafter is to be measured in minutes.
"What are you letting that precious husband of mine do now, Martin? He looks as
though he were up to something. I'm not used to my new Osnomian mind yet. Then
there's another thing--they figure to only two places, and we've got to have
the third place almost solid if we expect to get a smooth curve. Those of you
who are now looking at teevee screens can see my imaged likeness. The fields of
force of our hosts merely intercept these radiations, as a water-driven turbine
intercepts the water. Each body would have to be given velocity away from the
ship. She must have wept and pleaded, stormed and raged, feigned submission and
played for time--and her torment had not touched in the slightest degree the
merciless and gloating brain of the being who called himself Roger.

"This fellow's fighting so he's tearing himself to pieces. At its edge he cut
them entirely and inched his way forward by starlight alone.

"Yes, that's ours," he assured her. How does _that_ fit into your theory?"

"It doesn't. Can't say that I'm sold one hundred percent; but, as you say, the
Bergenholm is a hard fact to shrug off. . of _course_ that would be the one
they'd use in sacrificing a king's daughter. Even at that, though, it's a good
thing that space isn't a perfect vacuum, or we would have been clear out of the
Universe by this time. . "

"Clee!" Belle drove the thought. "And your folks, too, of course?" she asked.
She's too cocky for her own good--or strength. . . . Hello! Hello! Hello!" He
dropped the instrument and turned to Kinnison. "You want to go back, Captain,
and I need a runner--bad. Sir, I present Captain Phryges. "

"Not orders, son. "

Captain Bradley had stood by in silent astonishment during this conversation.
Thanks, Eunie--you're an ace. I can promise full cooperation and friendship for
myself and for most of our group; and I assure you that I can and will handle
any non-cooperation that may come up. There are six of us, and we could not get
along at all without each other. "

"I know it.

"READY--READY--READY. " Sawtelle shook his head sadly. Additional fast and slow
motions must, of course, be provided to rotate the mechanism upon each
graduated circle at the will of the operator. It is my idea to make the outer
supporting tube quite large, so that you will have full freedom with your
inner, or projector tube proper. Without any effort at all, apparently, it
continued downward through the concrete and steel and glass of the building;
and everything in its path became monstrously, sickeningly, revoltingly
changed. _"

"_You are throwing the entire weight of such a decision on_ me?"

"_In one sense, yes. _"

"_So be it. In another, only half, since I have already decided. . "



Outside the building three black forms arrowed downward. "

"Anything I can do, I've got to do. Warm-blooded, but egg-layers, not mammals.
Like this," and the Inspector spread in their minds a picture of a creature
somewhat like the flying tigers of Hodell, except that the color was black,
shading off to iridescent green at the extremities.

Through the daze of their wonder, a thought smote Seaton like a blow from a
fist. . . "

The voice ceased as she pulled the cord savagely and threw herself upon a divan
in a torrent of gasping, strangling, but rebellious sobs. I guess. . that code
is _unbreakable_!" she gasped. Its rate of revolution did not change; it either
did not know or did not care that its drivers were slipping on the smooth, hard
sand; that it could not climb the vertical metal plate; that it was not getting
anywhere. "

"But he _wants_ to have it broken?"

"Yes, sir. "That's their dish, Bill. "

"So forget about this psychic trauma. Told her bluntly; starkly; drawing the
full picture in jet black, with very little white. "

"Oh, you did? How sweet of you! But how. I've heard of her. "We have abundance
of power for all of your projector officers. We must have attained one hundred
percent neutralization--one hundred point oh oh oh oh oh--which we didn't quite
expect. Sodium and chlorin are the rarest of all known elements. Its immense
value is due, not to its rarity, but to the fact that it is an indispensable
component of the controlling instruments of our wireless power stations and
that it is used as a catalyst in the manufacture of our hardest metals. Is that
all, Mr. . . . that I'll stay just as I am--for thousands of _years_?"

"Just as you are. As soon as he had clamped a pale blue tractor rod upon the
sixth and last of the enemy fleet, he drove a torpedo through the gaping wall
and into the interior of the helpless war-vessel. I, personally, not only did
not want to become a monster, but would have given everything I had to stay
human. "

Acting upon this suggestion, the party seated themselves upon comfortable
divans, and Dunark rapidly dismantled the machine he had constructed. Frank's a
lot more fun. "

The staff had gathered in the lounge, as had become the custom, to spend an
hour or so before bedtime in reading, conversation, dancing, light flirtation
and even lighter drinking. "How come?"

"I'll answer you first, Dot. "I read you eight and one. It has been observed
for years that the published reports of your organization have left much
unsaid. The dying hand twitched upward. The beam expired. He puffed his
cigarette to a vivid coal--took it in his fingers--there was an audible hiss
and a tiny stink of burning flesh as the glowing ember was extinguished in the
clear, clean skin below the girl's left armpit. And it works. Lensmen and their
wives.

"Lensmen--especially you, Rod--George Olmstead is here, and his brother Ray is
available. "South of the river our tracks do not matter," he said, flatly. "In
the gorge they exist not. "

"There is, however, reason enough; although I am not sure that I can make it as
clear to you as I would wish.

"They have nothing like the _Skylark_, and no knowledge of intra-atomic energy.
"Oh, Conway, you're just simply wonderful!"

"I haven't done it yet," Costigan cautioned her. " The linked minds flashed
back to what the two had done together in the red opacity of Nevian murk; on
Nevia's mighty, watery globe--but that kind of thinking would not do. Samms.
Not too serious, but I'm taking him to the Hill, where I know he'll be safe.
Another Nevian appeared, and while the stricken guard was recovering, all four
arms wrapped tightly around his convulsively looping, writhing neck, the three
helpless Terrestrials were lifted into the air and carried bodily into the
quarters to which Nerado had assigned them. Do you wish to have your own guns
installed, or guns of our pattern? You are familiar with them now. "They can't
get nearly as far as Uranus on their power beam--it's all they can do to make
Jupiter. Now I'll see what I can find out about our breakfast. "

"That's a wonderful relief, Doctor!" cried Dorothy. "Maybe you'd better cancel
that 'of course'. . . going downstairs. "

"Good girl--keep him busy one minute more--he's getting all the warnings at
once and wants to get back to his board. You've met Alonzo P. Maybe _you_ can
make a Christian out of her. Anyway, you girls' slowness in producing has given
the old boy a big lift, and I'm mighty glad of it. "

"Oh, hell!" James snorted. "This is the biggest and nicest thrill I ever had.
Shiro sleeps across the hall. The rest of the rooms are for our guests on
future trips.

Shifting his grips, the guardian proceeded to tear a hole into his victim's
body, just below its breast-bone. "How about Peggy? You must see how she is!"

"Never mind," answered Crane's voice cheerily. This is an improved model--it
has quite a few gadgets of my own in it. You have guessed that we are headed
for Osnome?"

"I suspected it. . . . chairs, I think. Flying chairs are really hard to cope
with. Knives are too. . . . I invited that one, I guess, since I know you
aren't afraid of God, man, woman, or devil. "

"I have it," James said. . . . . . . . . . . . "

"Stop it!" she interrupted him sharply, "Forget it--don't ever even think of
it!"

"All x, ace. The immense starship settled downward toward the selected corner.
Here he was!

Should he use his headlights, or not? He did not know the Palainians' reaction
to or attitude toward light.

After four hours a small car bearing the license number of a distant
state--which was found, by subsequent telegraphing, to be unknown to the
authorities of that state--drove under the porte-cochère, and the hidden
watcher saw DuQuesne, without the papers, step into it. "They must be, then. It
is also evident that they have solved the secret of intra-atomic energy. My
work has been such as to keep me out of the public eye. I don't know what a
psychologist would say. "

"Well, then," said the practical Crane.

The room was of course very small; but, considering the importance of mass, it
was almost extravagantly supplied. Moving to the accompaniment of strange
martial music from concealed instruments, the two parties approached each
other, meeting at the raised platform or pulpit where Karbix Tarnan, a
handsome, stately, middle-aged man who carried easily his hundred and fifty
karkamo of age, awaited them. As he raised his arms, the music ceased. But
already he had acted. Father told you about the way I work, I suppose?"

"Yes. Exact data is not to be expected. Hints, suggestions, possible leads,
will be of inestimable value. "

"Well, I met a very short, very fat Venerian, named Ossmen, at a party at the
European Embassy. In the first place, you'd be amazed at how little publication
was ever done of passenger lists, and apparently crew lists were not published
at all. But here we are at my laboratory. As it was, his bullet crashed through
Blaine's head, while the gunman's went harmlessly into the carpet. The door
clanged shut behind him and in a matter of moments he stood in the control room
of the racer, divested of his armor and shaking hands with his friend and
co-laborer, Frederick Rodebush. He will be engaged in cutting your hair.

The Eddorian then drove in with an analyzing probe, only to be surprised
again--the Arisian's thought could not be traced! And Enphilistor, while
warding off the raging Eddorian, directed a quiet thought as though he were
addressing someone close by his side:

"Come in, please, one or more of the Elders. Kinnison _pere_ explained quite
patiently--for him--that all he had got out of the little fracas was a split
lip, that young Northrop's hair wasn't even mussed, and that if everybody had
been packing guns some scatter-brained young damn fool like him would have
started blasting and blown everything higher than up--would have spoiled Samms'
whole operation maybe beyond repair.

"Hi, Teddy!" a yell arose. Eats in the middle of the night. No storage
capacity--on this world he wouldn't need it--a few more seconds in the shade
would probably have killed him, but there's no shade here. Everything is hidden
from any possible visiray of the hexans. The bar is held parallel to the
guiding compass, and signal bells ring whenever any of the instruments show a
trace of abnormal behavior. At the same time others of our party will take the
palace and kill every man, woman, and child adherent to Nero. At intervals upon
its roof there winked into being almost invisible points of light. Knowing that
she had at last encountered a superior force, the sphere turned in mad flight;
but, prodigious as was her acceleration, the torpedoes were faster and all
three of them struck her at once. To that end they had arranged their circuits
to hurl seven hundred sixty-five thousand kilofranks--the entire power of their
massed accumulators and their highest possible cosmic intake--in one tiny bar
of superlative density, less than one meter in diameter! Everything ready,
Brandon shot in prodigious switches that launched that bolt--a bolt so
vehement, so inconceivably intense, that it seemed fairly to blast the very
ether out of existence as it tore its way along its carefully predetermined
line. I shall take them in spite of the puerile efforts of the fleets of your
Triplanetary League. Now I really know--I will feel the utterly cold and savage
embrace of that awful earth of yours as long as I live!"

"Oh, it's not so bad, Sitar. You will get us back to Earth some way, sometime;
I just know that you will. I'll count to ten. Now, Belle, since you're a Prime
and Lola's an Operator, you get the next toughest job. . Okay, damn it. I
_will_!"

"Of course you will, sir.

In 1902 we moved to a homestead on the Pend d'Oreille River, in northern Idaho.
"No one man, or group of men, no matter who they are, can be trusted with that
much power. "

"And now," he went on aloud, "if you ladies will please pick up this stretcher
we will move en masse, and _slowly_, toward the door. It is a violation of all
our instincts to have any commerce with outsiders, as you will learn as soon as
you see one of them.



Next morning, at the workman's hour of eight o'clock, the four Tellurians
appeared in the office of Margonia's Galaxian Field. A full company of the
Royal Guard was already there. But they're digging holes for the crosses and
there's the horn that the feast is ready. "

"No, I mean what does he eat when he's home?"

"It seems to be a sort of syrup, made from the juices of jungle plants, which
they drag in on automatic conveyors and process on automatic machinery. "With
you, Doctor Hilton, it will be by far the worst. . but I'm hoping it's only
that those creatures, whatever they are, have taken him so far away he can't
reach us. I believe I'll join you!"

"It most certainly is a relief to get this load off our minds: I could do a
little ladylike yowling myself," Margaret said; and Crane, lying completely at
ease, a thin spiral of smoke curling upward from his cigarette, nodded
agreement. There's a dozen things I want to do that I can't because we haven't
got the stuff. Your man Shiro. You are requested to proceed to their aid at the
earliest possible moment. . "

"That's why they kidnapped you, then--to make him give up all his rights to it.
"We slid back two steps for every three we took forward. We'll finish our own
ship and build our own organization and run it to suit ourselves. . . Costigan
_handled_ me.

"Thanks for being such a nice body-guard, you two. Use that only as a last
resort, after everything else has failed. But abate this intolerable nuisance,
and soon.

".

After a time she freed herself.

Here is the beginning of "Doc" Smith's famous Lensman series--the first of the
celebrated novels that set a pattern for science fiction. The prime datum
impressed into my banks, that the Stretts are in fact the strongest, ablest,
most intelligent race in the universe, proved to be false. Nor was this lack
surprising.

"On your toes, men," came Samms' quiet thought. Stevens and Nadia soon find
that the other ship is manned by friendly beings from Saturn. He then stepped
up to the lookout plate, and with his hand upon the control, pondered long the
possible consequences of what he wished to do.

"Good morning, Doctor DuQuesne.

"Jack and Mase, take the leader!" Kinnison snapped out the thought. "Nothing
much to it, though. "

"Not interested in what it says, but it might be smart to develop it, envelope
and all, for invisible ink and whatnot. "I've already quit--the exact second
you fired Clee. Sounds screwy--never heard of such a thing--but it acts like an
energy-converter. Eats energy, raw and straight. No storage capacity--on this
world he wouldn't need it--a few more seconds in the shade would probably have
killed him, but there's no shade here. Adultery, anything illicit, has always
been not only unimaginable, but in fact impossible. We pair--or marry, or
whatever they do here--once only. This is the first planet we have visited on
our first trial of a new method--new to us, at least--of interstellar travel. .
he must have a lot of vitality to have lasted this long--may be he'll live
through it yet. His nose was large and Roman; his jaw was square, almost
jutting; his bright-yellow teeth were clean and sharp. Every time that mighty
blade descended it cleaved its length through snapping spikes and impotently
grinding leaves; but more than once a flailing tendril coiled about his neck
armor and held his helmet immovable as though in a vise, while those frightful,
grinding saws sought to rip their way through the glass to the living creature
inside the peculiar metal housing. Geigers and other vastly more complicated
mechanisms flew toward Earth from every direction in space; streamed toward New
York in Earth's every channel of traffic. Every train and plane, every bus and
boat and car, every conveyance of every kind and every pedestrian approaching
New York City was searched; with a search as thorough as it was unobtrusive.
Their strict monogamy was really tested more than once; but it held. They've
got light and power again now, and good air, and they're working on it, but
opening the rise from the top is a damned slow job. I appoint you
Admiral-pro-tem Garlock, in command of Space Operations, and will refer to you
any other space-fighters who may come. They tried to keep me from finding out
anything, but I learned all about the compasses, built a few of them in their
own shop, and set one on Osnome. Instead of having a common ancestor with the
anthropoids, as they say we had, they evolved from a genus which combined the
worst traits of the cat tribe and the carnivorous lizards--the most savage and
bloodthirsty branches of the animal kingdom--and instead of getting better as
they went along, they got worse, in that respect at least. Throwing his body
sidewise and reaching out his long arm as far as possible toward the bar, he
succeeded in swinging it around so that he was running back toward the party
and the spacious landing field. The glare of the searchlight was snuffed out
and he saw a flashing light spell out in dots and dashes:

"Can you read Morse?"

"Yes," he signalled back.

"Copper sulphate," he said to Crane. Sciro was nearer, but Tedric was faster
and stronger and had the better horse. The main army marched away, up the north
bank of the Upper Midvale, which for thirty or forty miles flowed almost
directly from the north-east. . no-no, keep still! Too many planets listening
in--_verbum sap_. Anyway, THE PRESS smells something, too, and they're
screaming their lungs out, especially the sob-sisters. "

"No, I suppose not," grudgingly assented her lover, "and I won't, either,
unless he gives me at least half an excuse. Off. "

Costigan-Jones' desk was already clear, since there was little or no paper-work
connected with his position in Department Q. "

"Good God!" That news, to Clancy, was informative enough. "

"Yes, I guess that's right, too. Frank's a lot more fun. "

The staff had gathered in the lounge, as had become the custom, to spend an
hour or so before bedtime in reading, conversation, dancing, light flirtation
and even lighter drinking. "How you talk! But they're ready, Lola--let's go. "

"Nice try, Senator, but I'll have to score you a clean miss. . . you, or the
Elders, so much older and stronger. "

"Stop it! Oh, God, STOP IT!" The unbearable agony relaxed a little. " Eyes
locked and held. Do I understand correctly your thought that your race is _Homo
Sapiens_, the same as ours?"

"Why, of course it is," Lola answered in surprise. As it is, their instruments
are all registering dense silence. What happened?"

"We don't know, exactly. "

"Aren't you taking a lot of risk in giving away such secrets?"

"Not a bit. " She swung to her feet and walked out of the room, her every
movement one of lithe and easy grace. After what seemed to them a long time
they saw a sudden sharp flash, apparently an immense distance ahead, and
simultaneously three more alarm bells rang and three colored lights flashed
briefly.

"Now that we are able to act intelligently, the party should be introduced to
each other. All others of his ilk will die ere this day's sunset. Better get
your wet rags ready and get organized generally--every second will count by the
time we get there.

It was decided, and while the _Skylark_ was still some distance away, several
small islands became visible, and the period of rotation of the planet was
determined to be in the neighborhood of fifty hours. "They are apparently
trying to connect me with somebody. They can melt arenak that way.

"Ah, Tellurians, you are precisely on time. "I ought to beat your alleged
brains out! I've told you a thousand times to watch your own territory and
_stay out of mine_! If you had been where you belonged, or even taken my
signal, Frank couldn't have made that thirty-all point; and if Lois hadn't
netted she'd've caught you flat-footed, a kilometer out of position, and made
it deuce. Methinks I may be--Oh, the veriest trifle!--out of condition. But the
battle is almost over.

The flitter was not even out of the crater when the bomb went off. "While we're
out of touch with United Worlds you, as captain of the ship and director of the
project, are Boss, with a capital B. The Lord of Justice, High and Low. Even at
perihelion, an event which occurs only once in two hundred forty eight
Tellurian years, and at noon and on the equator, Pluto is so bitterly cold that
climatic conditions upon its surface simply cannot be described by or to
warm-blooded, oxygen-breathing man. "

As he spoke, one of the ultra-lights flashed around in a short, quick arc, and
the girl saw that instead of the fierce glare she had expected, it emitted only
a soft violet light. Now: is it your final thought that these interlopers are
in fact the descendants of those despised humans of so long ago?"

"It is. "

"It is also mine. He reappeared, grinning hugely behind his flaming wilderness
of beard. They crashed him there, and he won out and has what he went after.
Each Eddorian changed, not only its shape, but also its texture, in accordance
with the requirements of the moment. And so on. They kicked it around until it
got to Temple, and she brought her in here herself. Will you wait here on this
cushioned bench, Master?"

"No, we don't like to rest too much. I'm _always_ nice to anybody who is nice
to me. Do you think she could actually have de-handed those men? Uh-uh. This is
all I have to say to you, Enemy of Civilization. "I discussed it with him
yesterday. I can't prove it, however, even mathematically; because she's
altogether too full of too many new and untried mechanisms, too many
extrapolations beyond all existing or possible data. And you needn't worry
about the boys getting back safely. . . . I mean I think I can----"

Bernice, grinning openly now, stopped Deston's floundering. There isn't enough
gas left in the whole thing to make a deep breath for a microbe. "

"Hm--m--m.

"Dick, sweetheart," she whispered, while a hot blush suffused her face, "you're
not as dumb as I thought you were--you're dumber! But if you simply won't say
it, I will.

"It's up to you, Lola," Garlock said then. Two hundred kilovolts and four
hundred kilogunts.

"Fine-looking couple, Rod, if I do say so myself, as well as being smooth
performers.

"Pardon my curiosity, Orlon, but would you mind explaining the why of that
moving wall? We don't get it. "You will remember them. Why, those fields
absolutely will. . . . . how? You are not speaking, and. The truth, presented
to the people in language they can understand and appreciate, by a man whom
they like, admire, and respect, will be more attractive than Morgan's promises.
"

"That makes sense. And I'm not going to fight with you again.

And in a few seconds the commanding officers of the other two attacking
battleships were also surprised. You didn't work out quite all the theory. "









The Escape from Mardonale



"That was a wonderful bluff, Dick!" exclaimed the Kofedix in English as soon as
Nalboon and his guards had disappeared. Is it what you've been niggling at me
to say?"

"Aye, father and king, exactly--for as you say, you do. Didn'cha ever hear of
'Hellandamnation' Slayton? You will, buddy, you will. If Pershing doesn't give
him three stars after this, he's crazier than hell. Understand that you are to
keep off Miss Vaneman, words and actions. I am in charge of her, and I will put
up with no interference whatever. "

"_Something_ did something for you, that's for sure. Can you describe it?"

"Not exactly.

"Not too often, I'm afraid," Hilton said, and Theodora agreed.

All Rights Reserved. In fact, I was just going to get back onto my own job. Not
navigable, of course?"

"Not in subspace, and only so-so in normal.

When half the distance had been covered, the bar was reversed, the travelers
holding an impromptu ceremony as the great vessel spun around its center
through an angle of one hundred and eighty degrees. You know, of course, that
I've loved you ever since I got really to know you--and that didn't take long.
I never heard him called any real name before. We each know that the other
knows it. "

"Do they always. I'll ignore that crack about my mustache, though, since you
can't raise one of your own. "Except for this interview, you would have been in
New Orleans at that time, instead of in Spokane. . foggy, diffuse. . . and this
new C. "

"She's a damned female Ph. Wall-to-wall carpeting an inch and a half thick. A
grand piano. "

She smiled--a highly cryptic smile. There we shall play forces upon it which,
under those conditions, will be able to work it quite readily. . how would
'free' be?"

"Not bad. Those denizens seem to be particularly venomous, and we will not be
safe unless we have the most powerful and most efficient space-ship possible.

He did not know, he did not even suspect, that under certain conditions of
atmospheric potential and of ground-magnetic stress his perfectly designed
lightning-rod system would become a super-powerful magnet for flying vortices
of atomic disintegration. It'd be perfect if it weren't quite so. "

"How would that help?"

"It's a heat-engine, you know--works by absorbing heat. Put on that headset
again and get my plan, offering any suggestions your far abler brain may
suggest. We won't go down. I wonder if we couldn't plate a layer of that mirror
of yours upon the _Hope_ and carry along a few of those bombs? By the way, what
is that explosive--or is it something beyond Tellurian chemistry?"

"Its structure should be clear to you, although you probably could not prepare
it upon Tellus because of your high temperature. He thinks he can break down my
resistance. From the battery rooms of those fragments--open shelves, after
being sliced open by the shearing ray--he helped himself to banks of
accumulator cells from the enormous driving batteries of the ill-fated
_Arcturus_, bolting them down and connecting them solidly until almost every
compartment of their craft was one mass of stored-up energy. Mining, surveying,
dozens of jobs in many lines--far too many to list here.

In 1914 I graduated in chemical engineering. Question: should this authority be
political?"

"It should _not_!" James declared. "It takes United Worlds seven solid days of
debate to decide whether or not to buy one lead pencil. . . . and it might be a
lot less. Now get out on the job, all of you.

"Well, now that the battle is over, and since we are fed and rested, I suggest
that we slow down a bit and get ready to start back. It had been extremely
difficult for the Patrol's engineers to devise ways and means of tracing that
ship from departure to arrival without exciting suspicion, but it had not
proved impossible. What would you suggest, Dottie?"

"I don't know what general name should be applied to them, but for this one
there is only one possible name, 'The Skylark. " Tedric's eyes flamed more
savagely, his terrifically muscled body tensed.

"Quick! Get in. We shall not be destroyed, however. You see, we don't want to
point our beam too close to Jupiter or to any of the large satellites, because
the enemy might live there and might intercept it. Then, with that much done,
it'll be up to you to provide, since I'll have to work tooth and nail at the
forges. "Sorry to disappoint you, gentlemen, but--at any odds you care to name
and in anything from split peas to C-notes--Sam's right. Didn't mean to get
high, but I think we'll have help, if we can keep our heads up a while. I want
it straight from you. The monster neared the ground with ever-increasing speed.
Who else could it have been? Who else hath the strength of arm and soul, the
inner and the outer courage? No coward I, Tedric, nor ever called so, but on
that altar my very bones turned jelly. And Teddy Blake. After tens of thousands
of cycles of time they were doing a job for their adored, their revered and
beloved MASTERS. Reading a dead man's brain is steep, though. "

"I'll let you do it after we get there.

Perkins slid down into his chair in deep thought, his pale eyes under
half-closed lids darting here and there, his stubby fingers worrying his
watch-chain restlessly. I'm like that famous gangster's moll, you know, who
bruised easy but healed quick. "

Six heads nodded and there was a flashing interchange of thought among the
four. It won't surprise you, probably, to be told that you are to be this
system's councillor and--if we can swing it and I think we can--the first
President of the Galactic Council?"

Evans was so surprised that it was almost a minute before he could reply
coherently. "I ran and ran, and there you were. Couldn't ram him--he fell back
with my thrust. That goes right back to what we were talking about this
morning. She's a good little scout, too--not half as dumb as she acts--and
she's one of the squarest little aces that ever waved a plume; but as for
_playing_ her--too much like our kid sister. "

"True. " Kinnison's voice was not loud, but it had then a peculiarly carrying
and immensely authoritative quality. "But I've got to be _sure_ we can get back
without 'em. I have been attempting to analyze and to understand your purpose,
without success. You want to know why?"

"I think I know why. You can fill up or not--the fuel's here--just as you say.
The Larry also instructed me to explain, if you ask, how I got this way.
Leaving the registry, they were escorted to the dining hall, where a truly
royal repast was served.

At dusk he reached the Post. " Tallick's mien was. "Even if they can't paralyze
us, we can't hurt them, and we are heading back for Nevia. . . . . . "

"Why not have the boys in--Jill, too--and thrash it out?"

The young people were called in; the story was told; the problem stated. But
_give_! What's the score? Where's Kolanides? Or rather, what happened to him?"

"Dead. Folks, this is Sacner Carfon, Chief of the Council of the planet Dasor.
They saw us all the time, and when we headed for this, the Sixth City, he came
over from the capital, or First City, in the flagship of his police fleet, to
welcome us or to fight us, as we pleased. "



Seaton brought the vessel to the dock near the little group, and the Earthly
visitors remained inside their vessel while the rulers of Kondal welcomed the
sons and daughters they had given up for dead. As such, it filled every channel
of Universal Telenews for an hour. I know that you think it best to go out
there. Let's go!"

Down they went, past battery after battery of accumulators; climbing over and
around the ever-increasing number of huge steel girders and bracers; through
mazes of heavily insulated wiring and conduits; past mass after mass of
automatic machinery which Stevens explained to his eager listener.

".

"Give or take a couple of days, yes. Adlington!"

"Here!"

"Good! Was afraid you were gone--that was one of your bombs, wasn't it?"

"Yes. Well launched, just inside the screens. . . " Crane, with Seaton, began
making contacts, rapidly but with precision. "_How_ it will work!" She paused.
Then, suddenly, she whistled; the loud, full-bodied, ear-piercing,
tongue-and-teeth whistle which so few women ever master. He picked up a
fire-extinguisher-like affair and jerked open the door of a room a little
larger than a clothes closet. He was assigned to the bunk in which he would
sleep for the next fifteen nights: "Fifteen down and three up," ran the
standard underground contract. This double-normal gravity made the going a bit
difficult, but he could stand that a lot better than some of the other things
he was going to have to take. "

They ate, hugely and with unmarred appetite, of the heaped food which Nero had
provided. "I have only one new fact of any importance; the name of one of the
higher-ups and its corollary implication that there may be some degree of
cooperation between Norheim and Uighar. Have I your backing in wiping out what
is left of Sarpedion's power?"

"If you will support the Throne with the strength I so clearly see is to be
yours, I will back you, with the full power of the Throne, in anything you wish
to do.

"Where's the rest of it?" asked DuQuesne as he noted the size of the bottle. I
don't need to tell you, fellows, how glad I am to be able to do this. S.
copyright on this publication was    |

| renewed.









FIRST LENSMAN



E. "Considering the strangeness of the environment into which you have
voluntarily flung yourself so senselessly, your mind is well integrated and
strong. "

After some argument, the officers agreed. "I do not _think_ that you will go
back to Eddore; I know it. How does it look?"

"He isn't even close. The other continents will follow her lead--or else.

Woodwork there was none. "That's all they're interested in. Where'd you make
the raise? I didn't know we had anything like that on board. What did you do
for thread? You look like a million dollars--you sure did a good job of
fitting.

Seaton made his way to the power-plant, lifted in one of the remaining bars,
and applied a little power. At its edge he cut them entirely and inched his way
forward by starlight alone.

As the atmosphere had grown thinner and thinner with increasing altitude
Costigan had regulated his velocity accordingly, keeping the outer shell of the
vessel at the highest temperature consistent with safety. "Dad and I came out
to see that you were taking care of yourselves, and to see what you are doing.
Are visitors allowed?"

"No," replied Seaton promptly. "I'd lots rather stay hungry until tomorrow. I'm
just going to look on, and when I see anything I want, I'll grab it and put it
into my own brain. "

"Says you," Garlock replied, skeptically, and all four went to work as though
nothing had happened. "He probably has as much intelligence now as any one of
us. Not too long, though, Phil--fifteen minutes at most. To quote the
Unabridged verbatim--I had occasion to look the word up the other day and I am
appalled now at the certainty that there was a connection--quote; Mentor, a
wise and faithful counselor; unquote.

Wherefore, in the inconceivably remote past, there had been put into effect a
program of selective breeding and of carefully-calculated treatments. "This is
not good-bye, but if we don't pull through we'll go together, and that is what
we both want. I was going to turn them loose, but now I don't know. One moment.

The _Orion_ went back to Ardane and an eight-day wait began. "Whether or not I
would be interested depends, of course, on whether there's a position high
enough for. I'll bet that it will be six hundred Jovian years before any of
them ever come within a hundred kilometers of it again. "

The telegram was sent.

"Right, and he stayed Chief Devil, in spite of all the efforts of all his
ambitious sub-devils to kill him, until the turning-point of the First Jovian
War.

"I don't suppose that Seven is far away, is he?" Carfon asked of the woman. . "

"Oh, I already have, sir.

"I see. "Don't believe that you hit anybody direct, but the shock was pretty
bad. What is your plan?"

"Plan, hell!" barked the enraged chemist. What few of the prints I saw
yesterday will fabricate, and the fabrications will work. Who or what is back
of them? Why a deadlock that has lasted over a quarter of a million years? How
much danger are we and the _Perseus_ actually in? How much danger is Terra in,
because of our presence here? There are many other questions. And Teddy Blake.

Three weeks later, however, he was made Senior Chemical Engineer, in charge of
Melt-Pour. I may have mentioned before that there are one or two, or perhaps
even three men who are better chemists than I am. Your vessels carry lots of
fuel--why can the hexans outrun you?" Thus did King put his problem. "

"How do you--oh, I see. The ultra-receiver had come to life and the sounder was
chattering insanely--someone was sending with terrific speed, but with perfect
definition and spacing. The returning wanderers stared at their own world with
their hearts in their throats as Crane, who was at the board, increased the
retarding force sufficiently to assure himself that they would not be traveling
too fast to land upon the Earth.

Since the Stretts could orient themselves in less than one second after
emergence, even this extremely tight packing of missiles--only sixty miles
apart throughout the entire emergence volume of space--would still give the
Stretts the initiative by a time-ratio of more than ten to one. Nadia tore
herself from Stevens' embrace, to see upon the lambent screen the happily
smiling faces of her mother and sister. Her lips were red and sweetly curved,
her cheek was smooth and firm as so much brown velvet.



The next morning, after breakfast, James followed Garlock into his room and
shut the door. "First Officer Deston and three passengers. Second, there's no
evidence that they wander around much in space. As a Division Head, you will no
longer be under me, but I am right, I think, in assuming that you will work
with me just as efficiently as you do now?"

"I can't think of any reason why I wouldn't. . . . "

"Address me as 'Your Supremacy'," the All-Highest directed, coldly. " Teddy's
voice was gravity itself, although she, too, was bubbling over.

"Yes, this was yours, once.

Belle got in the first shot.

"Haven't you done anything yet, after all this time?" demanded the magnate. The
music rapidly ran the gamut to the limit of audibility and, in the same tempo,
the lights traversed the visible spectrum and disappeared.

"This fruit salad, or whatever it is, is divine," remarked Dorothy, after an
experimental bite. . . . "

"Just what would you call 'colossal' after what you did to the Navy?" Karns
asked. Many are better--but a hell of a lot are worse.

But of what importance are mere weeks of time to a race that has, for many
millions of years, been adhering rigidly to a pre-set program?

The sheer magnitude of the operation, and the extraordinary attention to detail
with which it was prepared and launched, explain why the Strett attack on
Ardvor did not occur until so many weeks later than Hilton and Sawtelle
expected it. Farther and farther back she dropped, back to the limiting range
of the mechanism upon which Cleveland and his highly-trained assistants were
hard at work. And during all this time the forces of the seven sectors had been
concentrating. . . "



Port Admiral Kinnison, shortly after directing the foregoing thought, leaned
back in his chair and smiled. You don't know that man Perkins--if that is his
name. "

"We'd add uranexite to our food, I suppose.

"Sneer if you like," DuQuesne continued evenly. "There'll be an incoming
signal, probably, in a couple of days. Shall we stick around and see whether it
comes in from Cavenda or not?"

"You and Jack had better wait, yes. . . . . . . "

"Exactly. "Check all these prints, against each other and the files. Check the
two halves of the torn sheet, fiber to fiber. " He turned to the Lensless
Lensman, now standing quietly before his desk. For a man as brilliant and as
penetrant in every other respect.

Roger launched his field of red opacity, but it did not reach even the
_Boise's_ screens. Remember that one-half gravity stuff!"

"Oh, that's right, but it certainly does look funny. And as for producing
stuff; uh-_uh_! If there's any limit to what they can do, I don't know what it
is.

Exactly at the expiration of the stipulated seventy-two hours, the Galaxians
began to destroy military atomic plants; and, shortly thereafter, the
starship's crew was again ready to go. This is the starship _Pleiades_, of
System Sol, Planet Tellus. As you already know, it has been decided that we
should not return to any of the minor planets, as to do so might invite a hexan
attack upon our police fleet which is as yet unprepared. But in the meantime,
the position of our friend James F. . "

"You unbearable, conceited, overbearing jerk! Why, I'd rather. But how of
these, my other friends? Are not some of them. No automaton this, geared and
set to perform certain fixed duties with mechanical precision, but a lithe,
strong man in hard training, fighting with every foul trick known to his
murderous ilk.

"Of these four, the first requires drastic and immediate personal attention.
Not only do I not know any of your various languages, but no one language would
suffice. "

"Hold her here. You've probably heard what they call me?"

"Yes, and I'm going to call you 'Babe', too, and mean it the same way they do.
Secure ship. "

"Shall I blow the air, sir?" Tworn asked. Our figures are right. You would
think that they would shun all strangers. That is my belief, as you can feel
for yourselves, but I cannot _prove_ it to you. Only time can do that.

Silent and bitterly absorbed, though surrounded by staring officers whose
fervent, almost unconscious cursing was prayerful in its intensity, the visiray
expert kept his ultra-instruments upon that awful struggle to its dire
conclusion.

Writhing, white and sweating, Hilton opened his eyes.

"That's it, all x," he announced, after completing his calculations, and he
reduced their negative acceleration by a third.

"Heavens, Dick, be careful! You'll spoil the whole thing!"

"No, I won't. "All gods act that way, in spite of what they--through their
priests--say. To each man a loaf each day, and all the meat he can eat. Knowst
the Upper Midvale, Tedric, above the lake?"

"But little, sire; a few miles only. I was there but once. Right?"

"Right. "

"We are stronger physically, more alert and more vigorous mentally, with a
keener, sharper outlook on life?"

"You are, Master. "I'm going to blow out Number One vortex with duodec,
yes--but I'm _really_ going to blow it out, not merely make a stab at it as an
excuse for suicide, as you think. I'm _shocked_, too. "

"Coming up, Bill," and Hilton and Sandra, followed by Laro and Sora, dashed out
to their cars. You _will_ do, Olmstead, if you live. Honest, incorruptible,
fearless, you know that he will make the best president we have ever had. If
you do not already know it, ask any one of the hundreds of thousands of strong,
able, clear-thinking young men and women who have served under him in our Armed
Forces. And hit them hard--pulverize them. Three minutes left, and over eight
feet to go. "

"I'll stay," Belle declared. "No, damn and blast it, I _won't_ give in. Right
now, or as soon as you can. Samms is shot in the shoulder.

Tallick joined them then, and Samms again described glowingly, as he had done
so many times before, the Galactic Patrol of his imaginings and plannings. "It
looks as though the first action would come while we're on duty. " She paused;
eyed him questioningly. You are a freer type, DuQuesne, unhampered by foolish,
soft fancies. "

"All ordinary vibrations--that is, all molecular and material ones, such as
light, heat, electricity, radio, and the like--were arbitrarily called waves of
the first order; in order to distinguish them from waves of the second order,
which are given off by particles of the second order, which you know as protons
and electrons, in their combination to form atoms. Off. " Samms turned to
Kinnison. "

"That will be the smart thing to do, Chief; then you won't have to take any, or
make any report at all," and upon this highly satisfactory note the conference
closed.

"A day or so--maybe less.

Virgilia Samms went to a party practically every night. Have you read any of my
papers?"

"I'm sorry. " The Lensman frowned in thought. Even a spaceboat's hard skin of
alloy plate, with all its bracing, could not take what was coming next. They
are merely the intakes for a tortuous system of tubes comprising a veritable
heat-exchanger, so that the air finally expelled is in almost perfect
equilibrium with the incoming supply in temperature and in moisture content.
Then the government of the North American Continent--not the
Morgan-Towne-Isaacson machine, but all nice and legal and by mandate and in
strict accordance with the party platform--abrogates the treaty and names its
own Council. . . "

"I'm coming to that. "I'll tell the world you're no weight-fiend--you're a
spacehound right. How're you coming, Belle?"

"Nice!" Belle's voracious mind had been so busy absorbing new knowledge that
she had temporarily forgotten about her fight with her captain. "I'm just about
done here. Nerado struck me as being a B.

"And we've hardly started to cover the distance back to Tellus. "Right here--he
covered almost half the visiplate!"

She outlined for him, as nearly as she could, the exact position of the object
she had seen, and he calculated rapidly.

"Fine business!" he exulted.

As the Guardsmen neared the top of the stairway the mercenaries
disappeared--enough of that kind of thing was a great plenty--and Tedric, after
a quick glance around to see what the situation was, seized his sword from the
bearer. The First Cause has willed that you should be the instrument through
which Kondal is this day made supreme upon Osnome. But I've got their plans and
notes, and enough solution for the present. From a fortress there would shoot
out, with the speed of a meteor, a long, jointed, telescopic rod; tipped with a
tiny, brilliantly-shining ball. Mining, surveying, dozens of jobs in many
lines--far too many to list here.

In 1914 I graduated in chemical engineering. Space-hooks bit and tore. Pikes
and lances were driven with the full power of brawny arms. Here and there could
be seen trooper and hexan, locked together in fierce embrace far from any
hand-line--six limbs against four, all ten plied with abandon in mortal,
hand-to-hand, foot-to-foot combat. "



"Oh, yes," came a smooth, clear, diamond-sharp thought in reply to Garlock's
introductory call. Just as the faidon which you each now wear--the eternal
jewel which no force of man, however applied, has yet been able to change or
deform in any particular; and which continues to give off its inward light
without change throughout eternity--shall endure through endless cycles of time
after the metal of the ring which holds it shall have crumbled in decay: even
so shall your spirits, formerly two, now one and indissoluble, progress in
ever-ascending evolution throughout eternity after the base material which is
your bodies shall have returned to the senseless dust from whence it arose.
Going to see if she'll read. Squat, huge, and heavy, it resembled somewhat an
overgrown machine rifle, but one possessing a thick, short telescope, with
several opaque condensing lenses and parabolic reflectors. Laboring under the
weight of the thing, he strode along corridors and clambered heavily down short
stairways. We have more than ample time to do that which must be done--the
fifth-order projector shall be completed before the warning torpedo shall have
reached the planet of the Fenachrone--therefore over-exertion is unwarranted.
He never goes out except to work, never has any except unimportant telephone
calls, and the instruments register only the occasional scratching of a match,
the rustle of papers, and other noises of a man studying. He did know, however,
the course upon which the vessel then was, and he would know courses and
distances from then on.

"That's fine," he said gratefully as she finished, and a peculiar expression
came over his face. "

"Why narrow the field of investigation?" laughed the girl. Keller, swearing,
strode away with Piddy. Doors clicked shut. They faced a desk which, in
addition to the usual equipment of the business man, carried also a
bewilderingly complete switchboard and instrument panel. For each Eddorian, as
its mind approached the stagnation of saturation after a lifetime of millions
of years, simply divided into two new-old beings. Immense bolts of lightning
flashed and snapped and crackled; thunder crashed and rolled and rumbled; rain
fell, and continued to fall, like a cloud-burst in Colorado.

While Rovol was working upon one of the last instruments to be installed upon
the controlling panel a mellow note sounded throughout the building, and he
immediately ceased his labors and opened the master-switches of his power
plants. " Since Samms did not ask what the exceptions could be, Morgan was
forced to continue. They checked in thirteen and eight-tenths seconds minus on
the station, and a fiery dialogue ensued when the computer questioned the
accuracy of the location of the station and refused point-blank to correct his
course.



Having attained sufficient altitude to be safe from any possible pursuit and
out of range of even the heaviest guns, Seaton stopped the vessel and went out
into the main compartment to consult with the other members of the group, about
their next move.

"Friends, it is our privilege to assist today in a most notable event, the
marriage of four personages from another world. Their heads were globes of ball
lightning. Spacemen average young, you know, and their wives are still younger.
Well, these young women got jobs, most of them remarried, and so on. . _" The
great surgeon, bearded and massive, stared into the plate, and in his surprise
started to speak in his native German. That is why I am not going to ask them.
But dad--what an idea! Can things be _that_ rotten, really?"

"They may be worse than that. He almost succeeded; his speed was almost spent
when he began to nose over. He then sent a few--surprisingly few--telegrams.
Almost parallel to us and not much faster--even at this long range, it is an
easy kill unless he starts dodging, as usual. However, they now had a
twenty-room house instead of a one-room dormitory to live in, and a staff of
twenty Oman girls to help them do it. Are we finally ready to go down and get
to work?"

"I am," James said. "

"Yes or no, please. More like evaporation or sublimation, except that there was
no gradual diminution in volume, and there was no detectable residue, either
solid, liquid, or gaseous.

"Begin, Lord Tedric," said the king. A door opened, and from its flaming
interior four figures leaped out into the air, followed by a puff of
orange-colored smoke.

As had been expected, the Americans had more missiles than did the enemy. You
aren't head of your department because you don't want to be. I can calculate
and design almost anything, and I can make a pretty good stab at translating a
design into fabricated material. I'm going to house it in, re-jewel it, and
find out where he is. "



Far ahead of them a port opened, a lifeboat shot out at its full power, and
again their receiver tried to burst into sound, but it was a vain attempt.

"They've got something, that's one thing sure, to be able to neutralize our
communicator beams that way," he admitted. Shoot!"

The pilot's right hand, forefinger outstretched, moved unenthusiastically
toward a red button on his panel. .
