. " 

"How do you, a stranger, know my name?" 

"I know many things. "It isn't only that I've got you out here in space, in 
danger and alone, that's stopping me. 

"Hell's jets!" Deston exclaimed. " 

"Why, I lost contact!" Miss Flurnoy exclaimed. And just where does that put the 
Palainians?" 

"I see. Even the smell of a Nevian--a malodorous reek of over-ripe fish--does 
in time become tolerable, especially if sufficiently disguised with creosote, 
which purely Terrestrial chemical is the most highly prized perfume of Nevia. 
Garlock calling. Guardians? The Arpalones, out in space, yes. The "whites" of 
their eyes were a light yellowish-green. " 

For several minutes no one moved. They certainly are on Venus, and they once 
were on Mars. " 

Six heads nodded and there was a flashing interchange of thought among the 
four. "Forty one minutes is my best guess. Now let's go--make it snappy!" 

"Not yet. No inhabitants, even. If sobeit sacrifice is done I intend to marry, 
some day, and have six or eight children. Then he said, "I'll do it, under 
protest, but I want it on record that I am doing it against my best judgment. 

Thus, it was a self-evident fact that no Terran could ever visit Ardvor; for 
the instrument-readings agreed with the report's statements as to the violence 
of the Ardvorian environment, and no Terran could possibly walk around in two 
tons of lead. Sun and wind had tanned her satin skin to a smooth and even shade 
of brown, and every movement of her lithe and supple body bespoke to the 
discerning mind a rigidly-trained physique. It did not seem as though anyone, 
whether in the buildings, on the sidewalks, or in the cars, was doing any 
blocking at all. Here's the observation you told me to take. 

"Uh-huh. 

"That will, I hope, become clear very shortly. "What a man sees with his eyes, 
hears with his ears--especially what a man hears _without_ ears, as I hear 
now--he knows with certain knowledge to be the truth. . how long? Have you any 
suggestions?" 

"Yes. "But you can now, I suppose, design the generators and projectors of a 
force superior to that screen. Gripped and activated as they all were by 
Hilton's keyed-up-and-stretched-out mind, they struck in what was very close 
indeed to absolute unison. " 



He looked her up and told her everything. "It won't work from there, will it?" 

"No, Master. We will place it for you," a calm voice sounded in their ears, and 
a pale blue tractor beam picked the massive jack lightly from the floor, and as 
lightly lifted it to its place beneath the broken bus-bar and held it there 
while Stevens piled blocks and plates of platinum beneath its base. How do you 
account for that?" 

"There, Mart, is one for the massive old bean to concentrate on," challenged 
Seaton: then, as Crane considered the question in silence for some time he went 
on: "I'll answer it myself, then, by asking another. The ground trembled and 
rocked and boulders, fragments of concrete masonry, and masses of metal flew in 
all directions as that city-encircling conduit of diabolical machinery was torn 
from its bed. Sciro was nearer, but Tedric was faster and stronger and had the 
better horse. Six mighty tear-drops--vastly bigger, faster, more powerful than 
their own--were rushing upon them, blanketing all channels of communication as 
efficiently and as enthusiastically as they themselves had been doing an 
instant before. We have never been able to reach Six with them, but we visited 
Three long ago; and every one who went there came back as soon as he could. 
Take it easy, Dad!" 

"You're the one to be told that, not me. " 



Leaving the bridal party, he made his way rapidly to the power room, where he 
found MacDonald and the two Martians inspecting the smoking remains of what had 
been the secondary bank of their powerful ultra-transmitter. 

His position was fully consolidated when, a few days later, a tremor of 
excitement ran through the Research Department. 

"Welcome, friend Captain Garlock. Perkins? Do you require medical attention?" 

"No," growled Perkins from the seat in which he had crouched immediately after 
eating. All about the green submarine there had been volumes of 
furiously-boiling water and dense clouds of vapor; now water and fog alike 
disappeared, converted into transparent super-heated steam by the blasts of 
Nevian energy. 

A few nights later, in inky blackness, a huge shape descended rapidly in front 
of the shed, whose ponderous doors opened to receive it and closed quickly 
after it. " 

"Are there any other races in this Galaxy more powerful than the postulated one 
now living on Fuel World?" 

"Data insufficient. After everyone except the nurses had gone, Crane showed 
them the rooms they were to occupy while caring for the wounded man. " 

"An unpleasant thought, truly," Ynos thought. The more power the better, as 
long as you can handle it. You haven't been able to rest because you have been 
raging and fuming so at unavoidable conditions--you have been fighting _facts_. 

". We don't even know whether we have a super-ship or not," and Samms described 
briefly the beginning--and very probably the ending--of the trial flight, 
concluding: "It looks bad, but if there was any possible way of handling her, 
Rodebush and Cleveland did it. Returning to the bar after a time, he again 
measured the angle, and found that it had increased greatly. The sixth was 
unlocked, but the passengers--a man and a woman--were very evidently and very 
gruesomely dead. 

At the Hall, Hilton's first care was to see how the work was going on. . if. " 

As the great speed of the ship rapidly lessened the distance, the sound grew 
heavier and clearer--like one continuous explosion. Then he drove a probe 
through the mental shield of the general in charge of the whole defense 
operation. 

"Oh. "_If I were doing it I'd have to start right now. " 

"What seems to be the trouble, Dick? Have you another hunch, or are you just 
rattled?" asked Crane. Silently they picked up the injured man and carried him 
gently into his own room, barely glancing at the wrecked safe on the way. And 
during all this time the forces of the seven sectors had been concentrating. 
Fire Control's "Zone Ten" had informed him that the object was at extreme range 
and hence there would be plenty of time. We are land-dwellers, and there is 
little if any land on this planet. _ 







VIII 



Hilton did not have to drive the peyondix-beam to the planet Strett; it was 
already there. It was designed only as protection from meteorites and other 
small bodies. You see, we don't know who or what we are up against. " 

"Fred," he called to his helper, "if anyone wants me, tell them that I have 
gone home. 

"But if he thought of that," she added, thoughtfully, "if he was brilliant 
enough to build up such a wonderful theory. " 

"Kragzex acknowledging, Virgil Samms," a thought snapped back, as 
diamond-clear, as precise, as Pilinipsi's had been. How'd you like to learn to 
talk English like Crane there does--without taking lessons?" 

Shiro smiled doubtfully, unable to take such a thought seriously. The ship, 
even though it was on a regularly-scheduled commercial flight, would be scanned 
intensively and continuously from the moment of entering Norheiman radar range. 
Fermius, although staggered by the sheer brute force of the abortive stroke, 
recovered almost instantly; dropping his sword and snatching at his gladius to 
take advantage of the wonderful opportunity thus given him. But I gather, from 
what you have said, that I would probably not be given a Lens to use purely for 
my own selfish purposes?" 

"That is my understanding," Samms agreed. They'd have it heavily 
shielded--there'll be no leakage at all. It did not even remotely resemble 
anything that the Lensman had ever seen, sensed, or imagined. " 

"Who or what _is_ that race?" Ynos demanded. 

"Who knows?" came Bergenholm's mental shrug, and simultaneously: 

"Nobody knows whether I can or not, but I am going to try," and Samms 
ended--almost--the argument by asking Bergenholm and a couple of other Lensmen 
to come into his office and by taking off his Lens. Since all dangerous 
meteorites have been shown to contain conducting material, that is enough to 
locate them, for radio finders automatically determine the direction, distance, 
and magnitude of the disturbance, and swing a light on it. 

"I think I can throw this thing straight enough and fast enough to chop off a 
Nevian's head before he can put a paralyzing ray on us," he explained grimly, 
but he was not called upon to show his skill with the improvised cleaver. Thus 
the endeavors of most of the battlers upon both sides, while earnest enough and 
deadly enough of intent, were almost comically unproductive of result. Six or 
seven hours, say--eight hours max. 

And there were tiny cameras with tremendous, protuberant lenses, the "long 
eyes" capable of taking wire-sharp close ups from five hundred feet; and other 
devices and apparatus and equipment too numerous to mention here. From the 
reflectors, through the doorway, there tore a concentrated double beam of pure 
destruction--but that beam did not reach its goal. Don't you know that I could 
never find out why 'x' was equal to 'y' or to anything else in algebra?" 

She led him back to his chair, where he drew her down to a seat on the arm 
beside him. Perkins pressed the switch which reduced the interior of the spy's 
wireless instrument to a fused mass of metal, and Brookings called DuQuesne on 
the telephone. Lock all the exits, of course, but it would be best to leave the 
doors between the rooms unlocked, so that they can be together or apart, as 
they choose. It spread, dissolved, and diffused with the extreme mobility which 
is one of its characteristics; and as it diffused and was borne outward the 
Nevians in their massed hundreds died. Rub _me_ out after we kill them off and 
you get nowhere. We will pick up speed faster and keep on doing it. They use 
gold and silver where we use copper, and platinum and its alloys where we use 
iron and soft steel. So when you blacklist us with the Society, _please_ let me 
know--I want to take a tri-di in technicolor of you doing it. " 

"Okay. Then, "But look! They're firing pistols--especially the one wearing 
number fourteen--but _pistols_?" 

"Recoil pistols--sixty-threes--for emergency use in case of power failure," 
Ashby explained. The Brass is going to take a certain amount of convincing. 

"Of course it's hot there--foundries always _are_ hot," she argued. " 

"'Smatter? Trouble with the Omans?" Hilton snapped. Imagine, if you can, a city 
of fifteen millions of people, throughout whose entire length, breadth, height, 
and depth no attempt whatever had ever been made to abate any noise, however 
violent or piercing! If your imagination has been sufficiently vivid and if you 
have worked understandingly enough, the product may approximate what First 
Lensman Samms was forced to listen to that day. Wonder if I'd better take you 
with me, or hide you and come back after you?" 

"Don't worry about that--I'm coming with you," Nadia declared, positively. This 
has been one long day for us, though, little ace, and I suggest that we sleep 
for about a week!" 









Callisto to the Rescue 



All humanity of Callisto, the fourth major satellite of Jupiter, had for many 
years been waging a desperate and apparently hopeless defense against invading 
hordes of six-limbed beings. However, the resistance of the air seriously 
affected the trajectory of many of the irregularly shaped smaller masses of 
metal, and all three men were kept busy flicking attractors right and left; 
capturing those strays which threatened to veer off into the streets or upon 
the buildings of the Kondalian capital city, and shifting from one piece to 
another so that none should fall freely. Deston stepped over to the board and 
flipped a switch. It was a tiny instrument, no larger than a watch, but of 
practically unlimited range. Not only is the location convenient to all 
interested, but there are to be found all necessary tools, equipment and 
material. Lightly, slowly, she settled downward, her jets raving out against a 
gravity fully twice that of her native Earth. " 

Another Arpalone appeared, indistinguishable to Tellurian eyes from any one of 
the others. 

"Of course it's hot there--foundries always _are_ hot," she argued. Big ones, 
but high; headed for targets well to the west. Everything goes in, this time. . 
. . and it won't come until after we've finished the computations. Frederick 
Rodebush. 

"Fred? Kinnison. "While we're out of touch with United Worlds you, as captain 
of the ship and director of the project, are Boss, with a capital B. " 

A company of soldiers approached, and Dorothy got up hastily. "There is such a 
job, you are ready for it, and you have your successor trained in the work of 
harvesting. 

"It is well that we had an unlimited supply of iron. They were perforce in 
single file; one ship opposing at least one solid ring of giant sluggers who 
did not have to concern themselves with defense, but could pour every iota of 
their tremendous resources into offensive beams. Since all these races, 
existing and yet to appear, had sprung from and would spring from the Arisian 
life-spores which permeated this particular space, they all were and would be, 
at bottom, Arisian. Along that pressor beam there crept a dull red rod of 
energy, which surrounded the fugitive shell and brought it slowly to a halt. 
Then, swinging the burden up over his shoulder-- 

"I go to fetch the others," he explained to his king. The Earthly clothing 
puzzled the captors immensely, but so strenuous were the objections raised to 
its removal that they did not press the point, but fell back to study their 
find in detail. 

"So did I--until today," Samms agreed grimly. Goodbye. " 

"Wait, please. Think on. 

Seventy. Numbers of our men are killed every karkam. I perceive that you are 
Dronvire. Make no conquests, and destroy all who by any chance may see you. 
I've been in it before--and when you see a man get a jolt of that stuff just 
once, you never forget it. What say we let _Skylark Two_ drift by herself for a 
while, and catch us some of Nature's sweet restorer?" 









The Zone of Force Is Tested 



Seaton strode into the control room with a small oblong box in his hand. Think 
of it! After twenty years of preparation--two long lifetimes--and for the first 
time in our history, we are actually going to war!" 

"I have thought of it at length. 

"Oh, that's what you're going to use! You know, I've been wondering about that 
stuff. 

"That's right, Barbara Warner. "It has been many, many cycles since they have 
taken Callistonians captive. 

"Back, you!" A guard waved them away. Hang on one minute more and we'll have 
gravity and you'll be O. They can't hurt us with hand-weapons, and before they 
can bring up any heavy stuff they'll be afraid to use it, because well be too 
close to their shell. . " Garlock was floundering; to be called upon to explain 
his ingrained antipathy to such a custom was new to his experience. 

"Well, folks, it's like this. Now you know that I do not want to discourage any 
one, but I can see small basis for optimism," Crane spoke slowly and 
thoughtfully. All menial work and most of the manual labor is done by the slave 
race. It's probably of the order of magnitude of half a million tons, since the 
stuff weighs more than half a ton to the cubic foot. The danger is from 
flash-blindness, flash-burn, sheer heat, shock-wave, concussion, and flying 
debris of all kinds. Three, there'd be no interstellar supply line for the 
Stretts to cut. The battle-cruiser's screens did not go down, even under the 
combined top effort of two super-dreadnaughts! And she did not have a beam hot 
enough to light a match--she must be _all screen_! But before the startled 
outlaws could do anything about the realization that they, instead of being the 
trappers, were in cold fact the trapped, all three of them were surprised 
again--the last surprise that any of them was ever to receive. " 

"The Lady Trycie, eh? The wind does set so, then, as I thought. 

"I think we'll be able to pull their corks now, all right, after we get some 
dope. "That gives me an idea, Loring. . " 

"Wouldn't there be three? Witherspoon?" 

"I doubt it. Yes, after this, most certainly yes," Temple said. Until finally 
he worked out one that might--just possibly might--work. But I didn't know that 
you--or have you already checked with the General and Mr. 



A portion of that conduit fully thirty miles in length was in the air, a 
twisted, flaming inferno of wrecked generators, exploding ammunition, and 
broken and short-circuited high-tension leads before the hexans could 
themselves cut it and thus save the remainder of their fortifications. Rovol 
then threw a switch, and a hemisphere of flaming golden radiance surrounded the 
laboratory and extended for miles upon all sides. " 

"That doesn't sound just right, but I'm listening. "I hate to think of Conway 
Costigan checking out. What we need and are going to get is a material of about 
two and a half million specific gravity. Without it I'd never have known that 
you're a better, smarter operator than Eggy Eggleston ever was or ever can be. 
_ 

_Nor did any Eddorian know that such fantastically rapid progress was being 
made. . if it's O. Good-night, old trapper!" 

"Wait a minute, Steve. We've got to find some pretty quick, somewhere, or else 
walk back home, and there's our best chance. What he needs--has to have--is 
full, ungrudging cooperation. I think I know what your second point is, but 
let's have it, just for the record. " 

"How much more have you got to do before you can start sending?" 

"Not an awful lot. I feel light, like a toy balloon, and I feel awfully weird 
inside. Oh, if I could only go out there myself. " 

Apparent weight grew less and less, until: "This is about enough for you, Miss 
Flurnoy?" 

"Just," the ComOff agreed, with a gulp. We could start out on the projectors, 
of course, instead of on the neutralizers, but that wouldn't prove anything and 
would only prolong the agony. Therefore, with us each generation covers one 
hundred years. " 

"I hear, sire. What do you want it for--that is, what, basically, is your aim?" 

"Our greatest god, Sarpedion, is wrong and I intend to kill him. . . . . but 
with an ungodly lot of something that neither of them had. No, we must do it 
legally or let him entirely alone. " 

"Well, you know platinum is a very scarce and highly useful metal with us. 

"See this cigarette?" he went on lightly. It is lumped in with what you call 
'intuition', the knowing-without-knowing-how-you-know. We have great abundance 
of all the heavy metals, but the lighter metals are rare. So how about 
organizing another team, one that hasn't got quite so much whammo? Enough punch 
to do the job, but not enough to backfire that way?" 

"It is highly improbable that such a team is possible, sir. "Why, we have 
almost infinite power--unlimited--sufficient for a lifetime of high 
expenditure!" 

But Roger made no reply, for the time of departure was at hand. Regulars all. 
No Rigellian is, or ever will be or can be, what you think of as 'corrupt' or 
'corruptible'. " She got up and stared directly into his eyes, her lip curling. 
Even one of those youngsters can swim the full length of the city without 
taking a breath. But it is also a fact that those adepts knew things and did 
things that take a lot of explaining. Keep a stiff upper lip, and if you want 
us, yell. 

"Gimme that armor!" he rasped, and climbed the blocks. Greater and greater 
became the acceleration, until their apparent weight was almost as much as it 
would have been upon the Earth, at which point it became constant. "I knew 
they'd blow! There goes my whole secondary bank--eight perfectly good 
ten-nineteens all shot to. " Belle's thought had not been interrupted by any 
passage of time whatever. There was a great hi-fi tri-di, with over a hundred 
tapes, all new. He was the only man I have ever known who combined the two 
qualities of the perfect witness. Let's all look around for the _Kondal_. " 

Under the urge of that mighty jack the ends of the broken bus-bar rose into 
place, while far off in space the Titanians clustered about their visiray 
screens, watching, in almost unbelieving amazement, the supernatural being who 
labored in that reeking inferno of heat and poisonous vapor--who labored almost 
naked and entirely unprotected, refreshing himself from time to time with 
drafts of molten water! 

"All x, Barkovis--that's high, I guess. My _kind_ may be important, but I 
individually am not. . how _dumb_ can you get?" Eddie demanded. Link your mind 
to Mitala's," and the linked Tellurian minds enforced the order. Either three 
or four capital ships. No warning. " 

"And they'll keep on building," Samms said. " The thought of a wife did not 
bother Garlock at all. " 

"Yes, Master. I've been thinking. Combination radio-phone, automatic 
language-converter, telepath, and so on. Almost level with her head the 
gorgeous blossom waved upon its heavy stem; based by a massive cluster of 
enormous, smooth, dark green leaves. 

Far out in space, Roger raised his eyes from the instrument panel and continued 
the conversation as though it had not been interrupted. Keller had come to 
Kinnison, accompanied by the Superintendent whom the Siberians referred to, 
somewhat contemptuously, as "Piddy. It may be that they had not anticipated as 
much resistance as we could offer with space-ships and intra-atomic energy. 
See?" 



True to prediction, the pilot ray of P6 came in almost upon the exact center of 
the micrometer screen, and Breckenridge smiled in relief as he began really to 
enjoy the trip. Nor was there shock or strain. He knew explosives, and he knew 
men. It is my opinion that atmosphere and temperature have more to do with 
evolution than anything else, and that the mass of the planet runs a poor 
third. The solids and liquids of its substance were resolved into their 
component molecules or atoms. Sorry I had only one of these ultra-wave spies, 
but once we're together it won't be so bad. . " Then she threw back her head, 
drove a hard little fist into a pillow, and spoke aloud through clenched teeth. 

"All x, Miss Newton--they're as harmless as mice. She wriggled loose from one 
of his arms, felt of her hair and gazed unseeingly into her mirror. " 

"Coming," and with the thought he was there. 

For miles beyond that edge, and as deep under it as frightful rays and enormous 
charges of explosive copper could penetrate, the ground was one seething, 
flaming volcano of molten and incandescent lava; lava constantly being 
volatilized by the unimaginable heat of those rays and being hurled for miles 
in all directions by the inconceivable power of those explosive copper 
projectiles--the heaviest projectiles that could be used without endangering 
the planet itself--being directed under the exposed edge of that unbreakable 
apron, which was in actuality anchored to the solid core of the planet itself; 
lava flowing into and filling up the vast craters caused by the explosions. 
"You be extra nice to her, Dick. 'Sa shame, too--what's the use of wasting it, 
now that we've got it all made?" 

"We are not done yet," cautioned Westfall, and even as he spoke an alarm bell 
burst into strident clamor--one of their far-flung detector screens was telling 
the world that it had encountered a dangerous frequency. The projector blast 
tears things up a little, but nothing serious. " 

"I'll ask him. Well, we've been in screen long enough, I guess. "However, it's 
no harder to swallow than Sanderson's Theory of Teleportation. " 

"What is the opposition?" Samms asked, quietly. Up a series of ramps they took 
the still form, placing it finally upon a soft couch in an enormous and heavily 
guarded central hall. 

"Where?" 

"Give me your thought. That is, he thought it was terrible--outrageous--a 
betrayal of the whole officer caste--but to me it makes everything just 
absolutely perfect. 

But with those new fields, shaking the world wouldn't be enough; in order to 
get deep enough to reach Virgil Samms they would damn near have to destroy the 
world. Wall-to-wall carpeting an inch and a half thick. A grand piano. " 

"What difference does that make?" he asked, in honest surprise. " 

"Where are you and what are you doing?" 

"Washington, D. "But we're up against something that is really a something, and 
I don't mean perchance. "If anybody takes one forward step, priest, or makes 
one move toward spear or arrow, your brains will spatter the walls across the 
street. Costigan turned his ultra-gaze into that space and saw that it was 
actually far from empty. " 

"Not in this life. But before he could say a word, Seaton silenced him. More 
than dropped; she was forced downward by one full battery of projectors; 
projectors driven by iron-powered generators. 

"I certainly do. He reached out and flipped the switch of his intercom. 

At any rate, he went briefly out of control, and the Rigellian sent him a 
steadying, inquiring, wondering thought. 

Low enough at last, he pulled the ring. No, darling, she isn't playing games. 
"They're silk, anyway, even if they don't look like much, and I'm just reveling 
in the feel of them next to me after the horrible, rough, scratchy things I've 
been wearing. I'm going to put him on the recorder and on the visualizer," 
Seaton continued as he connected spools of wire and tape, lamps, and lenses in 
an intricate system and donned a headset. But one shipload of Masters escaped 
and came here to Ardry--far beyond peyondix range. Every train and plane, every 
bus and boat and car, every conveyance of every kind and every pedestrian 
approaching New York City was searched; with a search as thorough as it was 
unobtrusive. 

"That is quite possible; for, fortunately, our art is not yet entirely 
intellectual, as is our music. "You do say the weirdest things at times! 
Possibly they would--and if the moon were made of different stuff than it is 
and had a different color, it might be green cheese, too! What say we go over 
and look at the stars?" 

"As you were, Rufus!" he commanded sternly. 

True to hexan nature, training and tradition, the fleet, hundreds strong, 
rushed savagely to the attack. They're identical physically, and so nearly so 
mentally that of them would be just as good on a team as both of them. His 
thick, slightly wavy hair was black. Lieutenant Colonel Franklin wasn't; but he 
was too much of a man to do the dir. Second, what really happened at the 
Ambassadors' Ball. Well, I'm perfectly willing to be convinced, but I warn you 
that I'll take a lot of convincing--and someone else will do the work, not you. 
He knew his stuff and the fish were there; big, wary, and game. Let's make it 
four feet. But just s'pose they'd missed it?" 

"No fear. 

"Sure. "You could go along, couldn't you, Perkins?" 

"Is it safe?" 

"Absolutely," answered DuQuesne. . . . . . hurt you, after all?" 

"Oh, no, not that--he didn't do anything but look at me--but that was bad 
enough--but I'm sick--horribly sick. He stripped to the skin and the observer 
smeared his every square inch of epidermis with the thick, gooey stuff that was 
not only a highly efficient screen against radiation, but also a sovereign 
remedy for new radiation burns. " How mistaken Cloud was! 

"QX," the Chief decided. 

Olmstead drove on to the lake and took up his reservation at the ramshackle 
hotel. And instead of remaining quiescent, waiting to be attacked, the cylinder 
flashed forward, inertialess, at maximum blast. Nothing like that first 
terrific passage-at-arms had ever before been seen. " His quiet, level voice 
carried more of menace than most men's loudest threats. He knows too much, 
about too many things. Crouching low, he struck down the arm, seized it, and 
dragged the girl out of the zone of visibility. Viewed in that light, the 
Thracian could not kill Tigellinus, because that bit of corruption had a few 
more jobs to do. The latter went, wondering what the old hard-shell was going 
to cry about now; for to be called into that office meant only one 
thing--censure. " 

"Like this," and, taking down a sheet of drafting paper, Cloud sketched 
rapidly. The best such missile is the tenth planet of their own sun. Three 
stiffly polite young men obeyed his summons. . . Belle, are you willing to bury 
your hatchet for about five minutes--work with me like a partner ought to?" 

"I certainly am, Clee. We'll set up that lab near a good trout stream, and I'll 
have a large and juicy vacation. 

"Kinda think I'll do most of it from here, but you can't always tell. I don't 
mind nitroglycerin or T. Ossmen--I can't _stand_ Venerians, they're so slimy 
and fat and repulsive!--and that leathery horned toad from Mars and that Jovian 
hippopotamus. Can we--_dare_ we--plant such genes where none have ever been 
known before?" 

Two full minutes of silence. Also, let me remind you that I am in a hurry. And, 
after the fact, she knew. 

"Here's the rough draft of the ray screen, Quince. The third of the mad flurry 
of swordcuts, only partially deflected by the sword which Fermius could only 
then get into play, sheared down and a red, a green, and a white plume floated 
toward the ground. But even that frightful weapon was useless--it spent its 
force harmlessly upon an impalpable, invisible barrier, a hundred yards from 
its source, and the bold lifeboat disappeared in one blinding explosion of 
incandescence as the captor showed its real power in retaliation. . " 

"Commoner? Bah! I ignored that word once, Tedric, but not twice. How about your 
identical-twin cousins, Ray and George Olmstead, who have been doing such a 
terrific job of counter-spying?" 

"Perhaps. The air, the stratosphere, and all nearby space were full of battling 
vessels of all shapes and sizes; ranging from the tremendous globular 
spaceships of the invaders down to the tiny, one-man jet-fighters of the 
Arpalones. " 

"But can't they be screened out?" 

"Not entirely, sir, without blocking reception completely. In a lifecraft? No, 
after this long, it must be the ship. Senses do not exist. You have one of them 
in your right coat pocket now. Your job's to get everything you can out of this 
bird's brain. Explain your mission, please, as simply as you can. " 

"You are childish, and that machine is impotent against my will. There they 
were! Not too close to where they should be, but close enough--it was Orion! 
And this thionite way-station, then, was somewhere near right ascension 
seventeen hours and declination plus ten degrees! 

He returned to the _Virgin Queen_. Scott's face showed in turn interest, 
amazement, and pitying alarm. A murmur arose from the other Kondalians, which 
was quickly silenced by the Kofedix. And not only on Earth. " 

"I'll take five thousand of that. Lensmen keep their promises, under whatever 
circumstances or however lightly given. " 

"I hope so, sin. I simply can not work efficiently here," Samms expressed what 
all knew to be the simple truth. Tall and heavy as Seaton was, the stranger was 
half a head taller and almost twice as heavy. He'll have to work full time on 
nebular configurations. 

"Target Two--Zone Nine," Fire Control said. If he couldn't do anything himself, 
it was up to him to juggle things around so that someone else could. First, to 
attempt it as soon as we shall have strengthened our armament as much as is now 
possible. It will be read and reread. Hurry that dope!" 

"Here it is now. "For your information, when I know what should be done, I give 
orders. Didn't even land on the planet. With one slight exception--here--you 
will notice that the lines of organization and purpose are as random as ever. 
"Since it is axiomatic that his destruction would have weakened Eddore somewhat 
and to that extent would have helped us, it is evident that some greater 
advantage will accrue from allowing him to live. "See that pistol clamped upon 
the top of the board? That's a token in remembrance of him. 

"You don't have to drive her as hard all the way, then, as you did last night?" 

"No, I'm out of range of Seaton's instrument now, and we don't have to kill 
ourselves. The large bottle was still nearly full, the seal upon it unbroken. 
No penetration at all. Vessels so marked will act as temporary flagships. No 
one understands it, but you two are pretty much the same. He is not a lawyer. 
The Brass is omnipotent, omniscient and infallible. I'm going to faint or 
something, sure. We ourselves will operate through forms of flesh of no higher 
intelligence than, and indistinguishable from, the natives of the planets 
affected. Nobody can. " 

"I know you can, sweetheart. " 

As they were going out to the landing field Shiro called to them and they 
turned back to the house, learning that Dorothy and her father had just 
arrived. With some men it is money, with others power, with others fame, with 
others women or some woman, and so on down the list. One incident, in fact--the 
detailing of which would serve no useful purpose here--was of such a nature 
that at its end: 

"Better pin-point me, don't you think, on that ramp?" Phryges asked, quietly. 
He went blithely to work on the Six line, where they wanted to start pouring 
twenty-pound fragmentation bombs, ably assisted by Tug and by two new men. The 
Head Engineer was an Arpalone, too--Engineers were not a separate race, but 
dwellers on a planet of extremely high technology--but he did know anything 
about space-drives. Neither of us would have converted if there'd been any 
other way in God's universe of getting the uranexite and doing some other 
things that simply _must_ be done. You haven't had a ten per cent load of fuel 
since you were launched. We lift in twenty seconds; I will count down the final 
five seconds. 

"According to the concept you fellows just helped me develop, it wouldn't have 
made any difference how many they sent," Hilton replied, thoughtfully. 

"I don't know whether you convinced Alexander Q. "Not a resignation. Can you 
tell me anything about it?" 

"No. "_What_ a brain!" 

"This is wonderful, boys, really wonderful; something completely new to our 
science. "_Hit_ it, for goodness sake, before we _all_ lose our nerve!" 

James stabbed convulsively at the button, and in the very instant of 
contact--instantaneously; without a fractional microsecond of time-lapse--their 
familiar surroundings disappeared. Carefree, busy, absorbedly intent, the 
Arisian mentalities roamed throughout space--until one of them struck an 
Eddorian mind. 

He was still on schedule. "Their optic nerves react differently than ours do. " 

And later, in a wingless craft flying toward the airfield, young Phryges broke 
a long silence. " 

"But what _are_ they?" Garlock blurted. Then, after a moment, "Any and all who 
are not tuned to me in five seconds will be returned immediately to their home 
planets and will lose all contact with this group. Okay? Worth a try?" 

"Sure--I'm in favor of anything that has any chance at all of working. It 
contains no copper, no arsenic, no heavy metals--in short, nothing in the least 
harmful to your chemistry. Then in furious haste he opened a nearby door and 
all three sprang into a tiny compartment. She then performed a series of flips 
that would have done credit to a professional acrobat; the finale of which left 
her sitting calmly in the previously empty seat. . " 

"I'm not interested. All the time I've been touching you I've been learning 
about you. I will be on this side of the peninsula; between us they'll be 
ground like ling. Each defending vessel, depending upon its type and class, 
carried from four up to a hundred or so burnished-metal reflectors some four 
feet in diameter; each with a small black device at its optical center and each 
pouring out a tight beam of highly effective energy. " 

"Your life matters to me, sire--and to Sciro!" 

"Aye, Tedric my almost-son, that I know. Your point on glory holes was very 
well taken--you won't have much time after the pump quits. One was so far 
advanced that almost all of its humanity were Seconds; one so backward--or so 
much younger--that its strongest telepaths were only Fours. I haven't felt so 
good since they picked me as home-town candidate--and that was a mighty small 
town and eight months ago. He reappeared, grinning hugely behind his flaming 
wilderness of beard. Yes, into your eyes. 

"Damn! I hated to do this," the sergeant grumbled, "On accounta I just got half 
dry. She _taught_ him to do that, damn her, without him ever knowing anything 
about it. " 

"You mean you aren't going to kill me, even now? Or even degrade me, or put me 
under arrest?" 

"I mean exactly that. Call District and have them rush through a change of 
spec--include heat-treat and a modified Charpy test. It had one sealed box, 
about the size and weight of a cigarette case. Four men and a woman--the 
nurse--were stiffly motionless at their posts; apparently the leads to the 
Station had been blasted in such fashion that no warning whatever had been 
given. The raging torrents poured into that yawning cavern, filled it, and 
piled mountainously above it; receding and piling up, again and again; causing 
tidal waves which swept a full half of Nevia's mighty, watery globe. 

"You certainly sounded savage, Dick. Neither of you appear any the worse for 
your experiences. If, on the other hand, you think that you're going to try to 
snuff a vortex, the stuff stays here. But the battle is almost over. They 
marveled at the amount that had been accomplished, and the Kofedix told them: 

"Both vessels will be finished tomorrow, except for the controlling 
instruments, which we will have to make ourselves. 

"Grab him now!" Rodebush yelled, and even while an avalanche of falling rock 
was burying the countryside Cleveland snapped a tractor ray upon the flying 
fish and pulled tentatively. He should have been an overseer when they built 
the pyramids--flogging slaves because they wouldn't step just so. He is unique 
in all history. And if they had anything at all back there, they must know a 
lot by now. He and Sandy would sit in the office and analyze and synthesize and 
correlate. 

Dazed, groggy, barely conscious from his terrific effort, Jones stared owlishly 
through the heavy, steel-braced lenses of his helmet while the timbermen set a 
few more courses of wood and the rotary walked itself and the clinging burley 
up and out of the hole. To prevent this catastrophe he went back to the key 
point in time and sought out the key figure--one Tedric, a Lomarrian ironmaster 
who had lived and died a commoner; unable, ever, to do anything about his 
fanatical detestation of human sacrifice. But I'm afraid I've been wasting 
time. 

Temple took over. Do you, Roderick K. " 

"Ah--very good. For once, I agree with you without reservation. Marry if you 
like, or simply breed--your unions with this planet's humanity will be fertile. 
" 

"Second, we have a more specific obligation in that the life of many, many 
worlds has sprung from Arisian seed. Under observation. " 

Kinnison nodded. " Samms grinned, a bit shamefacedly. I don't like this 
telepathy business. Couldn't ram him--he fell back with my thrust. " The elder 
Kinnison's jaw-muscles did not loosen, his darting eyes did not relax their 
vigilance for a fraction of a second as he Lensed the thought. I'll shut off 
everything and we'll drift it. He then fastened about his left wrist the Order 
of Kondal, the highest order of the nation. To return to the subject, I 
resolved my dilemma long since. Two men, instead of the usual three, could run 
the rotary; that is, they could tend the complicated pneumatic walking jacks 
which not only oscillated the cutting demon in a geometrical path, but also 
rammed it against the face with a steadily held and enormous pressure, even 
while climbing almost vertically upward under a burden of over twenty thousand 
pounds. It is for the consideration of this plan that this meeting has been 
called. You're there, bucko!" 

"Thanks, Chief,". Ardvor was, always and everywhere, full daylight. " 

"Thank you. Then, "But look! They're firing pistols--especially the one wearing 
number fourteen--but _pistols_?" 

"Recoil pistols--sixty-threes--for emergency use in case of power failure," 
Ashby explained. 

"I see. Pressure, twenty-eight pounds--about the same as ours is, now that we 
have stepped it up to keep the Osnomians from suffering. The zone of force is 
necessary to shield certain items of equipment from ether vibrations; as any 
such vibration inside the controlling fields of force renders observation or 
control of the higher orders of rays impossible. "To be effective, the charge 
of explosive at the moment of impact must match, within very close limits, the 
activity of the vortex itself. " 

"It's real coal," Stevens announced after a series of tests. Picking her up 
lightly as a baby, DuQuesne carried her over to the space-car. Such was its 
initial velocity and so slight was the force of gravity of the satellite that 
they were many hundreds of miles from the exit before they began to descend, 
and Breckenridge studied his screens narrowly for signs of hexan activity. I 
will spare your life, if you can give me anything of enough value to me to make 
extra time and trouble worth while. " 

"Fifty grams--and everybody knows that Samms himself is rated at only sixty? I 
_knew_ that you were somebody, Conway!" Clio exclaimed, undeterred. " 
Bergenholm's deeply resonant pseudo-voice left no doubt at all in any one of 
the linked minds. After we go to Mars, we intend to explore the moon 
thoroughly. Now they wanted, and would have, the ultimate thrill. " 

"Only because you're so badly bunged up. . a stalemate. Then Saunders spoke, 
running both hands through his unruly shock of fiery red hair. This meeting is 
adjourned until nine o'clock--or, rather, the meeting will begin then. Soon 
their astronomical instruments revealed the cities of Europa to their gaze, and 
as soon as they discovered that the civilization of Europa was human, they 
destroyed it utterly, with the insatiable blood lust that is their heritage. 
Then, shaking himself and stretching, he glanced at his clock. " 

"What are you talking about, Chief?" James asked. Marriage between such 
highly-evolved persons as are you four is wished by the First Cause, whose 
servants we are. The Lenses were--definitely--not working. There were even a 
few structures that looked like rocket pits. D. degrees I worked under Charles 
E. You will go away now. I merely performed the labor. 

"Aren't you going to kill them?" asked Sitar, amazement in every feature and a 
puzzled expression in her splendid eyes. Even Cleveland's drill was 
ineffective. However, I missed the point that if control is possible, the 
controller must be a mind. 

"My lieutenant and I were upon a mission of some importance, but it is more 
important to take you to Callisto, for there may be many things in which you 
can help us. Otherwise even she, with all her training, couldn't sell such a 
big bill of goods. " 

"We sure do, Steve," she concurred emphatically. Straight road for miles, and 
nothing in sight either way. You're dead. " 

"I landed on the campus of the University of Arisia," Northrop stated, flatly. 
There were four practically simultaneous detonations--silent, but terrific 
explosions as the pent-up internal energy of solid pentavalent nitrogen was 
instantaneously released--and the four insensately murderous spheres 
disappeared into jagged fragments of wreckage, flying wildly away from the 
centers of explosion. Finally, their most pressing questions answered, they 
turned their most powerful ultra-beam communicator toward the yellowish star 
which they knew to be Old Sol. Nor was this lack surprising. "They" would 
scarcely let George Olmstead know where "they" were taking him. She looked at 
him with awe and pride. Another point. " 

"Oh. " 

The four secured themselves; the two men checked, for the dozenth time, their 
instruments. " 

Then the queen, followed by the Lady Rhoann--who, although she bowed her head 
meekly enough, was shooting envious glances at her sister, so far ahead and so 
evidently the cynosure of so many eyes. Instantly the needle began to revolve, 
and for many minutes there was no apparent change in its motion in either the 
primary or secondary bearings. The music, now a crooning lullaby, grew softer 
and slower, until his deep and regular breathing showed that he was sound 
asleep. As it was, while that one missile did not reach the city, its frightful 
atomic charge exploded under six hundred fathoms of water, ten scant miles from 
Atlantis' harbor, and very close to an ancient geological fault. "Are you quite 
sure that you haven't had _anything_ to do with it? But supper is ready--let's 
eat. We're both in fine condition and in hard training. I am going to work. 
I'll remember that address--and the cat--and I'll never go into the place!" 

"Every event does affect the succession of events," Mentor acknowledged, 
equably enough. So think it over for a few days and when each of you has 
definitely made up his or her mind, let me know. The room had only one lack; it 
did not have an ultra-wave visiplate. " 

"Murgatroyd, do you suppose?" Although surprised by Kinnison's tremendous 
report, Samms was not dismayed. " 

No hostile demonstration was made as they dropped lower and lower, however, and 
Seaton, with one hand upon the switch actuating the zone of force, slowly 
lowered the vessel down past the reflectors and to the surface of the water. In 
fact, even I may decide to refer it to a higher echelon. . . " Her face fell. 
"You observed and understood? You did not. 

He went--not exactly boldly--forty-five in hand. But how come we got off on 
_this_ subject, I wonder? Because when we aren't fighting, like now, it's 
purely wonderful. . . " 

"Well, go on. 

"I'm using only a few thousand kilograms of thrust, and I'll cut that as soon 
as we touch atmosphere, long before she can even begin to heat," Rodebush 
explained. Here's what I thought we could do," and he went over in detail the 
only course of action which his survey had shown to be possible. They made up 
packs of food, filled their capacious pockets with emergency rations, buckled 
on Lewistons and automatics, donned their armor, and clamped into their 
external holsters a full complement of additional weapons. Women's minds and 
Lenses don't fit. 

"Tell me what it says, quick, Steve!" Nadia implored. If we have to do that, 
let it be only as a last resort. Thus the pirate's beams stormed and struck and 
clawed and clung--uselessly. The impurities, however, are not sufficient in 
quantity to offer a point of attack to any ordinary reagent. It's probably of 
the order of magnitude of half a million tons, since the stuff weighs more than 
half a ton to the cubic foot. They will also, of course, appear in person 
whenever and wherever you wish. I command you to rest; and, to insure that 
rest, you may pull that cord, which will establish about this room an ether 
wall: a wall to cut off even this my voice. 

How? By air? Along the road? Through the woods on foot? He had no way of 
knowing--talking, even on a tight beam, was out of the question. The ceremony 
over and their course carefully plotted, Carfon stood at the door of the 
_Skylark_ a moment before it closed. And every mind present knew that those 
aliens were, at long, long last, fulfilling their destiny and were, in that 
fulfillment, supremely happy. That's probably what disintegrated their brains. 
Then they looked the ship over rather casually, as though they didn't see 
anything they were interested in; crippled the motors; and went away. When you 
have finished your meal, the beam is shortened. "If it's Blaine against Babe, 
it'll be Lopresto against Herc. " 

"I see. "In that case I won't wait to try to find out what he thinks. " 

"Nor is it necessary. Close up. As soon as you quit making a damned fool of 
yourself by wasting energy that way, we'll set the _UC-1_ back down where she 
was and get on with our business here. Thence to the Radiation Laboratory, 
where it was ascertained and reported that the armor did not leak--which was 
reasonable enough, since each was lined with Masters' plastics. A couple of 
them show disks. I got there first with the most, and I'm not worried about 
competition. It would pass. Remember, Jarve, what you said about the 
irresistible force? We'll need it. The Brass is going to take a certain amount 
of convincing. 

That surface was cratered and jagged, exactly like that of the half always 
facing Clamer. . . that changes the whole picture. And they would destroy 
Earth, without a qualm, if in so doing they could kill the First Lensman. 
DuQuesne shut it behind them and in overwhelming relief, the adventurers 
huddled together as from the wilderness without there arose an appalling 
tumult. 

"I'm convinced of it, for one reason in particular. His voice, though light and 
thin, nevertheless seemed to be of powerful timbre. We must work through 
echelon upon echelon of higher and lower executives and supervisors if we are 
to control efficiently the activities of the thousands of billions of operators 
which we must and will have at work. "I had not intended you two men to live so 
long. He was trained for years, then planted. 

He arrived. "You're no more a commander than my lowest office-girl is! Just 
wait 'till you get down here, you green-haired hussy, you shameless notor. Is 
that it?" 

"That's it exactly," Seaton assured her. Doyle, two," ordered Kinnison. "What 
did you expect? She got her hair and eyes from you, why not your 
hard-headedness, too? One thing, though, that's all to the good--she's got what 
it takes to strip ship that way, and most of 'em haven't. 

Perhaps it would be better to say that the planet Strett became a junior-grade 
nova, since the actual nova stage was purely superficial and did not last very 
long. Good hunting, Jill!" 

Samms, still seated calmly at his desk, reached out and pressed a button marked 
"GARAGE". " 

"She's a damned female Ph. One question. But we're _not_ going to be separated. 
" 

"Don't be dumb, Norman. Another hunch?" 

"No, sir, a logical procedure. N. T. , everybody was ravenously hungry. . . . 
sure. . . . . . . . " 

"Oh, I did it day before yesterday. "Where are you?" 

"Observatory. "_You_ should scream--oh, that ridiculous Tellurian prud. It is 
of the utmost importance to save that creature's life if possible; because we 
do not want one of their fortresses launched against us--and in any event, it 
will not do us any harm to have a friend in the City of the South. "If you 
can't talk sense keep still. Astron, the First of Energy. All Eddorian 
knowledge of that meeting had been suppressed and no more contacts had been 
allowed to occur. They now lie in the Patrol vaults near Weehauken. 

"We thank you with all force, Earthmen, for what you have done for us this day. 
We could not. Since they fought that other crew, and haven't blown us up, they 
aren't active enemies of ours, and may be friendly. Base metals mostly melt at 
around fifteen hundred, and that crucible is still dry as a bone at better than 
seventeen. You're an athlete of some kind, and I'm sure you're a star--I ought 
to recognize you, but I'm ashamed to say I don't. That boy Seven is keen as 
mustard, too. He had long since given over the pursuit of the speedster, and he 
did not rush in to do hopeless battle beside his fellow Nevians against the 
Tellurians. The condition isn't much better right now; it's a vicious circle. 

"Nobody knows how it leaked. You haven't even started a starship; you've 
scarcely started making plans. Production was speeded up. 

"I know I said you'd have to kiss me next time," Lola said, very low, "but this 
act needs just this much of an extra touch. Instead, each vessel cut its 
tractors and pressors, spun end for end, reconnected, and retraced almost 
exactly its previous course; cutting out and blasting into nothingness another 
"plug" of Black warships. 

"Yes, sir," answered the Japanese. First, there is nothing either intrinsically 
right or intrinsically wrong about liberty or slavery, democracy or autocracy, 
freedom of action or complete regimentation. To further these ends, we Lensmen 
suggest that you re-form your fleet and proceed to Arisia. Definitely. " 

"How _sure_ are you of this, Miss Samms?" Knobos asked, in deadly earnest. " 

"What next, Dick?" 

"Now the real trouble begins. They stood motionless, locked in each other's 
arms, while DuQuesne dove through the opening and snapped the door shut behind 
him. 

The macro-beams! Prodigious streamers of bluish-green flame which tore savagely 
through course after course of Nevian screen! Malevolent fangs, driven with 
such power and velocity that they were biting into the very walls of the enemy 
vessel before the amphibians knew that their defensive shells of force had been 
punctured! And the emergency screens of the invaders were equally futile. The 
tractor beams snapped without warning, and so prodigious were the forces being 
exerted by the lifeboat that as it hurled itself away the three passengers were 
thrown violently to the floor, in spite of the powerful gravity controls. 
Check?" 

James did not express the thought that Tellus must by now be so far away that 
no possible effort could reach it; but he could not repress the implication. 

Samms knew the price of that power would be high. You'd probably never even get 
up there alive, to say nothing of getting back here. And shortly 
thereafter--first by square feet and then by acres and then by square 
miles--the surface of the golop began to die. 

"Lucky again!" Kromodeor, in the wardroom, turned to Wixill as the two prepared 
to take their respective watches. 

Then captain and director, in two Oman ships with fifty men and a thousand 
Omans, leaped the world-girdling ocean to the mining operation of the Stretts. 
But those talented fingers were doing more--far, far more--than that. " 

"Decidedly not. "If your work is of enough importance to enough people, Mentor 
would certainly give you a Lens. One, that with your return the conditioning 
should be broken. "In that I understand your viewpoint thoroughly. But it 
became something else. See?" 

"Uh-uh," she dissented. . . . . she measures up, of course, but. That girl has 
got everything. . and you know, Clee, I'm pretty sure you're going to get us 
back home. That she had studied intensively, and had tabulated the reactions 
of, each of the entities on her list. 

Then: 

"Now you know a little of it," Hilton said. "Your ancient Masters, being 
short-lived like us, changed materially with time, did they not? And you 
changed with them?" 

"But we did not change ourselves, Master. "I wouldn't miss this for a farm!" 

"Got him solid," declared Seaton, after a careful inspection of the various 
attractors and repellers he had bearing upon the prisoner, "Now let's get him 
out of that suit. "That doesn't mean much, though, as they'll be just about in 
the sun and they'll be coming like a scared dog. Here he was alone--everything 
he needed must be manufactured by his own hands, from its original sources. 
Knowing there was no other place on Earth where he would be safe, we took him 
to The Hill. 

All of the Patrol ships had, of course, the standard equipment of so-called 
"violet", "green", and "red" fields, as well as duodecaplylatomate and ordinary 
atomic bombs, dirigible torpedoes and transporters, slicers, polycyclic drills, 
and so on; but in this battle the principal reliance was to be placed upon the 
sheer, brutal, overwhelming power of what had been called the "macro beam"--now 
simply the "beam". 

These two, Garlock and James, were heads of departments of, and under iron-clad 
contract to, vast Solar System Enterprises, Inc. Petrine?" 

"Not 'practically', we are Petrinos all. How soon can we get married?" 

"I'd say right now, except. . m," mused Brandon. "We seem to be getting nowhere 
fast. I'm not exactly enamored of Lola's idea, either, but as the answer it's 
one hundred percent to as many decimal places as you want to take time to write 
zeroes. And besides, you'd name it '_Dimples_'--what a _revolting_ thought!" 

"And what would you name it? '_Virgilia_', I suppose?" 

"Far from it, my boy. " 

"What!" Samms exclaimed, and the boys could feel his mind work. We set no 
limitation whatever as to quantity and with no foreseeable limit as to time. We 
should run an eye over it, don't you think?" 

"By all means," she agreed again. "Jarvis Hilton, you are one of the keenest, 
most intelligent men who ever lived. Have you?" 

"I know what you mean. Okay, but I want you both--Fao especially--to realize 
exactly what that means. Twelve enormous masses of metallic checkerwork, 
covered with wide cooling fins, almost filled the vast hall. There is a good 
chance that, by combining the best points of the warfares of many worlds, we 
can evolve something that will enable us to turn back these invaders. Partially 
obscured by clouds and with its polar regions two glaring caps of snow--they 
would be green in a few months, when the planet would swing inside the orbit of 
its sun around the vast central luminary of that complex solar system--it made 
a magnificent picture. Clee's appreciation was obvious. You saw me flip the 
tenth-piece. It was the First Team. " 

"Name your reward, Lord Tedric. She did not reply, but turned to Perkins. " 
Belle's thought had not been interrupted by any passage of time whatever. " He 
drew the fragrant smoke deep into his lungs and frowned at her in mock 
seriousness. . . . but he probably does. "That all this virility and nubility 
and glamor is pure coincidence?" 

"No," Hilton said, with an almost imperceptible flick of an eyelid. You've 
found out that your famous sex-appeal won't work. Get me a mace; the lightest 
real mace they've got in their armory. And finally, much farther back, at a 
very respectful distance from their strange new god, arranged in dozens of more 
or less concentric, roughly hemispherical rows, stood everybody who had had 
time to get there. They devoured vegetation, crops, animals, and mankind. "That 
is the most viciously loaded question I ever heard--it can't be answered except 
in the wrong way!" 

"Okay, I'll make it semantically sound. It's lonesome, you know, 'way out in 
deep space. Second, we BuSci people will stay here until they do. . oh, excuse 
that crack, please, Dr. 

"Might as well get it out of your system, Belle," Garlock said aloud. Austine's 
College had more students that year than ever before or since. "I'll hunt Bill 
up and make passes at him, see if I don't. Its entire bulk was protected by the 
shield whose qualities had so surprised Costigan; a shield far more effective 
than any Tellurian scientist or engineer would have believed possible. Fatal? I 
don't know. " 

"I should call them perfectly natural, considering the circumstances," he 
answered. That was the worst yet. However, either course will take lots of 
power, so the first thing I've got to do is to build a power plant. "I'd rather 
widen it, myself--I might prefer a general, even to a physicist!" 

They went up to the main saloon and joined the mêlée there, and after one 
dance with Verna--all he could claim in that crowd of men--Crowninshield turned 
to Brandon. It is written. Besides, I _know_ they did. Flying chairs are really 
hard to cope with. Otherwise I take his job away from him. . . a thousand. " 

"Sure, I forgot--guess I was getting in deeper than is necessary, especially 
since this whole thing of beam transmission is pretty crude yet and is bound to 
change a lot before long. Let's locate the sun and get in touch with Samms. 



A month passed. 

No part of this book may be reprinted without written permission of the 
publishers. 

Nearly two days passed before the gleaming copper cylinders were finished. "I 
have work to do. He'll be sure to follow you in their rotten car. " 

"How come?" and "In what way?" Delcamp and Fao demanded together. And since he 
has 'no adequate laboratory equipment aboard', he wants to take a dozen or so 
Omans back to Terra, where he can really work on them. We've got away clean 
with lots worse stuff. I would suggest that he work in the woods at least a 
hundred miles from his nearest neighbor, though it matters nothing to me how 
many people you kill. "The only course of action which carries any promise 
whatever of success--and its probability is only point one eight--is the one 
recommended by the Faros, modified slightly to include Artomenes' suggestion of 
sending his best operative on the indicated mission. Sciro and his force struck 
out. We'll get us a bite of supper and turn in. It is a good thing we brought 
along ducks and white soft shirts. How sure are you that you can stop such 
missiles with ordinary beams?" 

"Not at all, sir. Super-Ship in Action                                187 

XVII. Now see what you can do about getting me run through your mill. Since you 
are reading my very mind, you know exactly what I am _really_ thinking, for 
better or for worse. " 

"Yes, sir. Too fine a detail. She had been asked for an opinion; she set out to 
give it without apology or hesitation. Then, too, he has dropped remarks which 
would imply that he actually saw things that happened long before any living 
man could possibly have been born. Why else would he?" 

"Maybe he loves her. . . . " 

"Your evasions are so transparent, my lord; why not tell the truth?" Rhoann did 
not exactly sneer at the man's obvious embarrassment, but it was very clear 
that she, too, was in a vicious temper. 

Election Day dawned clear, bright, and cool; auguring a record turn-out. 

"We lined up a thousand and one signals, sir," Northrop reported for the pair, 
"but only one of them carried a message, and it didn't make sense. " 

"Left out? It shall be so built--but of what use will it be?" 

"The empty spaces shall be filled after I have returned from my quest. Platinum 
melts somewhere around seventeen-fifty, tantalum about twenty-nine hundred, and 
tungsten not until 'way up around thirty-three, or four hundred--and that, by 
the way, means lots of grief. Without a word into the transformers they seized 
Bradley and Clio. . . . I have heard of you human beings, of course, but have 
never considered seriously the possibility of meeting one of you mind to mind. 

Wherefore, out in open space, the Earth a fast-shrinking tiny ball and Sol 
himself growing smaller, paler, and weaker at a startling rate, the _Chicago's_ 
speed attained an almost constant value; a value starkly impossible for the 
human mind to grasp. Let's see, what have they given us so far?" 

"We've got to hand it to them," responded DuQuesne, admiringly. You should not. 
You weigh one thirty-five to my two seventeen. They point the way back to your 
Earth, which is so far away that even my mentality cannot grasp the meaning of 
the distance. Two, to feed itself additional information by peyondiring all 
planets, wherever situate, bearing intelligent life. Can't seem to crush his 
screens, so I guess we'll have to try something else," and a thoughtful 
expression came over his face as he slowly extended his hand toward another 
switch, with a questioning glance at Westfall. The Standard Employment 
Contract, however, is short, explicit, and iron-clad. Paul Jones, a big, hard, 
top-drawer chicle technologist, set up the Four line to pour demolition blocks. 
The small vessel no longer struggled, nor even moved, but was merely resisting 
passively. That is, of course, unless you contemplate deliberate, cold-blooded 
murder. " 

"_Trade_! You _tomcat_!" Belle's nostrils flared. If I, working with you and 
having you pounding it into my head, couldn't more than half believe it. But 
has it ever occurred to you that that's a hell of a way to treat a first-class, 
highly capable brain? To waste it on second-hand, copycat, carbon-copy stuff?" 

"Why, no, Master, it never did. " She snuggled even closer, and both listened 
to what Rodebush was saying. Temperature, like Osnome most of the time, but 
fairly comfortable in the winter. 

"Thank you, Danny," Samms said, as appreciatively as though he did not know 
exactly where his ground-car was. "Scores, perhaps hundreds, of us will never 
again breathe the clear, pure air of Titan. 

Actually, there was very little to see. You do it like so. That is an 
Anglo-Saxon weakness. No matter how many wives or husbands may be linked 
together in that way, it merely means that after death their spirits will be 
grouped into one. My way is absolutely the only way that will work. " 

"No. " 

"And yet you gave it to me. "I said two point four _micrograms_, not 
milligrams. They've made no allowances for anything, not even the reversal--and 
I figure four thousands for that and for minor detours. 

"But. "Throw us a rope!" 

"A Dicky-bird, you mean," interposed Dorothy. They're smart. I had to play it 
as though the whole Oman race is no more important than a cigarette butt. Since 
I can see no other course possible within the constituted framework of our 
democratic government, I recommend that we continue our present activities, 
such as the international treaties and agreements upon which we are now at 
work, intensifying our effort wherever possible. It was evident that Nalboon, 
usually stern and reticent, was in an unusually pleasant mood. George 
Washington Jones, after a meticulous Service Special survey in every direction, 
reached a large and somewhat grimy hand into a screened receptacle in his 
battered suitcase and touched a Lens. As the Skylark shot into the air with the 
greatest acceleration that would permit its passengers to move about, the grand 
fleet of Kondalian warship fired a deafening salute. But every iota of 
knowledge that any of his progenitors had ever had was still his. We've got to 
take the same risk anyway, no matter what we do, whenever we start to use any 
kind of driving power, so there's no use worrying about it. After a time 
DuQuesne also lapsed into unconsciousness, making no particular effort to avoid 
it, as he knew that the involuntary muscles would function quite as well 
without the direction of the will. "I'll look her up and let you know, Larry. I 
was weaned quite a number of years ago. And 'Rhoann' merely, Tedric, remember?" 

"Rhoann. " 

As he spoke, he snapped a switch and from a port under the starboard wing there 
shot out into space a small package of concentrated destruction--a 
rocket-propelled, radio-controlled torpedo. Clayton and Schweikert used a 
little caustic language--via Lens and to their fellow Lensmen only, of 
course--but Samms and Kinnison were well enough pleased. But don't strain 
yourself; and I mean that literally, not as sarcasm. There's no danger at all 
of consequences--except weddings. " Tedric went to one knee. She stepped into 
the boat and reached for the lever. 

Into that mind his multi-mind flashed, its every member as responsive to his 
will as his own fingers--almost infinitely more so, in fact, because of the 
tremendous lengths of time required to send messages along nerves. They 
returned to their assigned places to see crosses, standing as close together as 
they could be placed and each bearing a suffering Christian, filling the whole 
vast expanse of the arena. If Crane will lend me a pistol, we'll make the rush 
together. 

And all throughout that doomed city Nevians dropped; quietly and without a 
struggle, unknowing. It would not take too many scouts, would it?" 





"No; but it wouldn't be worth while. . You are the first real woman I have ever 
known, and some day, if life is good to me, I hope to have some girl as lovely 
care for me. Soon the two vessels were almost side by side, moving cautiously 
forward, and Seaton set up a sixty-inch parabolic reflector, focused upon a 
coil. It seemed as though the entire tip of the mountain was gone; had become a 
seething, flaming volcano on a world that had known no volcanism for hundreds 
of thousands of years. 



"_The critical point in time of mankind's whole existence is there--RIGHT 
THERE!" Prime Physicist Skandos slashed his red pencil across the black trace 
of the chronoviagram. Seaton, dragged along like a small boy trying to hold a 
runaway calf by the tail, was covering the ground in prodigious leaps and 
bounds; at the same time pulling himself up, hand over hand, to the bar in 
front of him. He discovered that fact just in time; in another second or two he 
would have been out beyond the moon's protecting bulk and thus detectable from 
Cavenda. 

"You are all of the highest evolution and your minds are all untainted by any 
base thoughts in your marriage. "Dare you invade my privacy unannounced and 
without invitation?" 

The escort shrank back, but the Domak stood his ground, although he was plainly 
taken aback. " 

"It _would_ be too much to expect them to be dumb enough to figure us as dumb 
enough to depend only on our visible Grand Fleet, after the warning they gave 
us at The Hill," Kinnison admitted. Should he flash back to Eddore, or should 
he wait and take the planetoid, with its highly varied and extremely valuable 
contents? He would wait; a few moments more would be a completely negligible 
addition to the eons of time which had already elapsed since action should have 
been begun. 

"Therefore, friends, you see how little we are able to do for you, we a race 
fighting for our very existence and doomed to extinction save for a miracle. 
They know, then, that neither they nor we can do anything as long as we 
maintain the zone--that it is a stalemate. A good workman does not causelessly 
destroy his tools. " He turned to the Martians. "Eight foot checkerwork to the 
hangin', anyway, huh?" 

"Yes. Here she could come at him by any route of the three. Having smoked it, 
he apparently swallowed the butt, with evident relish. "Or somebody will rot in 
jail for a hundred years. . it _tears_ it," Karns said then. Besides, I _know_ 
they did. But at least, I'm glad that I can go out with you," and her glorious 
eyes were shining with unshed tears. " 

The scene shifted. 

"Well, _that_ helps--I don't think," Garlock thought, glumly. 

"I deduce those characteristics from their unprovoked attack upon peaceful 
ships, vastly smaller and supposedly of inferior armament; and also from the 
nature of that attack. 

Suddenly, almost imperceptibly, the Sigma curve gave signs of flattening out. 

For the enemy vessel was not the last of the low-powered hexan vessels, as 
everyone had supposed--it was the first of the high-powered craft, arriving 
long before its appearance was expected. Have the boys break out a couple of 
spare Number Twelve struts, some clamps and chain, four snatch blocks, and a 
hundred feet of heavy space-line. "No fuel is coming aboard without being 
tested!" he roared. "What can _you_ throw straight enough to do any good?" 

"Anything I can reach," she replied, confidently. This event was foretold in 
detail; in such complete detail that I was deeply, terribly shocked. Beside him 
and within him and behind him. I am discussing these points at such length so 
that you may realize exactly your position. Just see what you can do, please, 
and let me know. There was a big, clean desk; a wiry, intense, gray-haired man. 
" 

"What difference does that make?" he asked, in honest surprise. I will also 
have prepared some kind of a space-suit in which he can be brought from his 
vessel to ours," and the surgeon took the measurements and went to see that the 
"operating table" and suit were made ready for Kromodeor, the sorely wounded 
Vorkul. . Excuse me, please, I shouldn't have said that, in view of what I see 
happening here. Why can't this one do it? Of course it can. _What_ a load of 
stuff! I was right--of all the women on this project, you're the only one I've 
ever been really afraid of. 

The Nevian vessel--the sister-ship, the craft which Costigan had seen in 
mid-space as it hurtled Earthward in response to Nerado's summons--hung poised 
in full visibility high above the metropolis. 

"Oh, isn't it wonderful!" breathed the girl, awed. He has found out since that 
an electrical machine in another room, which was not running that morning, 
played a very important part. In sum, indefensible actions based upon 
unwarranted conclusions drawn from erroneous assumptions. " He turned to the 
flabbergasted three. And toward them also flung the Earth, enlarging with such 
indescribable rapidity that Cleveland protested involuntarily, in spite of his 
knowledge of the peculiar mechanics of the vessel in which they were. Even were 
I able to paint a sufficiently vivid picture with words, you of Earth could not 
begin to understand their utter ruthlessness and inhumanity, even among 
themselves. In another week she would report back to the city whose name she 
bore, where her space-weary crew, worn by their long "tour" in the awesomely 
oppressive depths of the limitless void, would enjoy to the full their 
fortnight of refreshing planetary leave. Roban and Tarnan remained 
contemptuous. . . No, but I want. report on you showed that you had brains, 
ability, and guts. That gives me a great big start--I won't have to mine the 
ores and smelt the metals, as would have been necessary otherwise. That 
operation was _planned_. Here's the mathematical proof. You're a fighter, too, 
and a damn good one. 'Final,' I won't accept. " 

Then silence; and waiting. "Strap yourselves in solid, everybody!" he sounded 
in general warning. Both Falnians staggered backward until they were stopped by 
the room's wall. Furthermore, in the incredibly incandescent frenzy of the 
chosen field of action--the cylinder was to attack the cone at its very 
strongest part--no conceivable material projectile could have lasted a single 
microsecond after leaving the screens of force of its parent vessel. " 



"The more you talk, the more I am convinced that it was DuQuesne himself," 
declared Seaton, positively. "You are _not_ going to wreck this project. You're 
looking great, too--I think I'll bring my girl out here to live. 

"We came through in very good shape, considering. " 

Witnesses: 

ROBAN, Emperor of Kondal. . . . . but after all, if the big dope didn't realize 
that half the women aboard, including Sandy, had been making passes at him, she 
certainly wouldn't enlighten him. 

"Get out of his light!" Jack snapped, and pushed his friend violently away; and 
as the vicious sunlight struck it, the native revived and began to revolve as 
vigorously as before. Should he flash back to Eddore, or should he wait and 
take the planetoid, with its highly varied and extremely valuable contents? He 
would wait; a few moments more would be a completely negligible addition to the 
eons of time which had already elapsed since action should have been begun. . . 
. Spearmint? Slayton--give me Weatherby. " 

"Just this. "You, who have been so afraid of us for over two thousand million 
Tellurian years that you dared not let us even learn of you? So afraid of us 
that you dared not take any action to avert the destruction of any one of your 
budding Civilizations upon any one of the worlds of either galaxy? So afraid 
that you dare not, even now, meet me mind to mind, but insist upon the use of 
this slow and unsatisfactory oral communication between us?" 

"Either your thinking is loose, confused, and turbid, which I do not believe to 
be the case, or you are trying to lull me into believing that you are stupid. 
And it's the first time--here's the crux, as I see it--that any of us has been 
concentrating on any destination at the moment of firing the charge. High above 
their heads the mirror again encompassed Seaton, and again shot upward and 
southward. How about you, DuQuesne?" 

"Not I," declared that worthy, emphatically. "A king you--act it!" 

Hard blue eyes glared steadily into unyielding eyes of green. Then, too, we 
will lose heavily. "No one except the very few selectees will know anything 
about it. How about you? Coming?" 

"Yes. "But either we get our people or Terra doesn't get its uranexite. They 
shall build other robots, who shall in turn construct another planetoid; one 
this time that, wielding the theoretical maximum of power, will be suited to my 
needs. The pilot vessels, with their flaming red screens, each followed by a 
cone of space-ships, drew closer and closer together, approaching the 
_Fearless_--the British super-dreadnought which was to be the flagship of the 
Fleet--the mightiest and heaviest space-ship which had yet lifted her 
stupendous mass into the ether. 

"Oh. "If anybody comes up with anything by then, let me know. " 

"Ready. " 

"At my word 'ready' you will begin to assemble all your mental force and power. 
We're getting in as close as the Law will let us. 

Again and again the wave of golop built up high enough to crack and to shatter 
that feeble wall; again and again golop and water met in ultimately furious, if 
insensate, battle. But I'm devilishly and gleefully glad, Clee, that I was here 
to hear _somebody_ give you cards, spaces, and big casino and still beat the 
lights and liver out of you at your own game of cold-blooded logic!" 

"We gunners must go now. Nothing was ornamental--everything was stripped to its 
barest fundamental necessities--but every working part functioned with a smooth 
precision to delight the senses of any good mechanic. Knowing from the lack of 
any apparent motion that the power had been sufficient to pull the car away 
from that fatal globe, his first thought was for Dorothy, and he tore off his 
helmet and turned toward her. He knows just exactly how far to go, and never 
goes beyond it. As a young operative, skilled in the punishing, maiming 
techniques of hand-to-hand rough-and-tumble combat, he had brawled successfully 
in most of the dives of most of the solarian planets and of most of their 
moons. His actions may give you some idea as to his feelings, though he is an 
accomplished diplomat and may conceal his real feelings entirely. The problem 
was handed to Siberia. 

"Their source of power is the intra-atomic energy of iron. Women, too, were 
there in profusion; women for the taking and yearning to be taken; and the tide 
of revelry ran open, wide, and high. "He is almost exactly my size and build, 
is the only man I know of who could do anything with the solution after he got 
it, and he has nerve enough to do anything. And again the Nevian shear-plane of 
force slashed at the _Boise's_ tractor beam; but this time the mighty puller 
did not give way. "If the younger generations start weakening we'll fix the 
Omans. Therefore--coldly, impersonally, logically, tellingly--he told the whole 
terrific story. But since Morgan was as undisturbed as ever, and as sure of 
himself, he began to regain his wonted aplomb. I wish that I could make you 
understand that Seaton and Crane have got something that we haven't--but for 
the good of our plants, and incidentally for your own, please remember one 
thing, anyway; for if you forget it, we won't have a plant left and you 
personally will be blown into a fine red mist. Scarcely had the search begun, 
however, when the visirays were again cut off sharply--the rapidly advancing 
main fleet of the hexans had arrived and the scintillant Vorkulian screens were 
again in place. Seaton stood now at the summit of his pride. The head, like the 
body and limbs, was entirely devoid of hair. . complete coverage. Have you got 
a counter?" 

They had. And he's so big. 

He was vastly more interested in the stars, however, than in delivering the 
broadleaf. 

For several seconds Garlock had been half-conscious that his accidental 
companion was trying, with more and more energy, to disengage his encircling 
left arm from her waist. Definitely. For good. " 

"So have I, and I'm going to yell again, right now," Jack declared. 

But the outlaws were not to win a foothold upon that inimical planet easily, 
nor were they to hold it without effort. There is only one chance in numberless 
millions that anywhere within the cruising range of your newly perfected 
space-ship there may be an iron-bearing planet upon which you can effect a 
landing. And he, equally openly, held her forearm for a moment in the full 
grasp of his hand. "That is, if you're damned sure that you can run if you have 
to. . . I should be able to lock down the next shot in five. . . . . " 

"Hi, Quincy! Hi, Norman!" a merry voice interrupted. Its mind is tremendously 
strong, of no curiosity or imagination, and of very little peyondix. I could do 
with some more sleep myself. I feel it. One word and I'll tell the old buzzard 
just where to stick the job and exactly where to go to do it. " 

"Let's go, folks!" said Seaton hastily, drawing Dorothy back toward the 
Skylark. 

And tried--and tried--and tried. Get the dope, then do as you think best. I 
wonder how he does it?" 

"It doesn't look as though we are ever going to find out--he's sure a 
bear-cat!" replied Seaton, as the karlon, unable to ascend further, dropped in 
a slanting dive toward the lowlands of Kondal--the terrible, swampy region 
covered with poisonous vegetation and inhabited by frightful animals and even 
more frightful savages. " Costigan's arm tightened around her. "Those forgings 
are going through the most complete set of tests known to the industry, and if 
they go into the Skylark at all it will be after I am thoroughly convinced that 
they will not give way on our first trip into space. 

"Well, I am beginning to understand it a little," said Dorothy finally. Shove 
out the receptor screens to the limit and drive 'em. We are in most desperate 
need of two things which you alone can supply--salt, and that strange metal, 
'X'. There were a few whose arrangement was almost orderly. I will give him a 
share--say fifty percent, or forty--of the time and effort I save on my own 
projects!" 

"Just so you _go_, Tallick. 'Smatter with it?" 

"It's a good three hundred degrees Kelvin too hot. A mighty smart operator. " 

"You said also that there were 'millions and millions' of worlds that have 
solved the problems facing us. To Adams it was only one tiny datum in an 
incredibly huge and complex mathematical structure. "I want to tell you 
something, Belle. Since neither of us can put it on we'll have to rig up an 
automatic feed. I am different. . . . . . . . . . . . . " Jack's thought 
snapped off as he tuned to a local Lensman. 

"It can be done, sir, with complete safety. How about it?" The other Lensmen, 
even Samms, agreed enthusiastically. "Now, suppose that you are not my slave 
and simple automatic relay station. 

"I beg your pardon," he said, with amused irony. I'll have supper ready for you 
at sunset. " 

"Exactly what is the alternative?" 

"We will not go into that. As the wonderfully skilled mechanics set to work 
without a single useless motion, the prince stood silent, with a look of care 
upon his handsome face. 

"Yes. " 

"Well, you know it's loaded with uranexite. " 

"Have you read your marriage certificate, Dick?" asked Margaret. Too big. Every 
square millimeter of skin and mucous membrane. 

"Outside the Fence" was different. 

"Barkovis, I've got a thought!" he snapped into the microphone. The mind does 
not lie--even such lies as you call 'diplomacy'. I have never seen an 
undertaking of such size go forward so smoothly and with such fine 
co-operation. " 

"I hope so," she replied, keeping her voice from breaking only by a great 
effort. But say, Dunark, it wouldn't be good technique for you to eat our food 
for any length of time. That ball of fire they picked out for you would be a 
blue-ribbon dish in anybody's cook-book. Willoughby's graphs were accurate. 
And, surprisingly enough, the Nevians made no demonstration of hostility. 
Nerado _was_ stalling for time, and that's what they're doing down 
there--that's all those fire-balls are for. Together, and in the _Skylark_, I 
believe you invincible. It is transmitted and used as direct current, our 
generator and motors being so constructed that they can produce no etheric 
disturbances capable of penetrating the shielding walls of our city. Then, 
failing in that as he knew he would fail, he demanded something to _do_. Any 
other ideas, fellows?" 



As neither Crane nor Dunark had any other suggestions to offer, Seaton brought 
out the mechanical educator, watching the creature's eyes narrowly. 

But to resume the thread of narrative, George Washington Jones went to Eridan 
as a common laborer; a mucker. 

Clayton and Schweikert had both. And say, from the throw of the pump and the 
volume of the sump, will you give me the best estimate you can of how much time 
we've got? I want at least an hour, but I'm afraid I won't have it. " 

"Check. "Trenco is there, off to one side. But enough of this idle 
chatter--take them back to their quarters!" 

Back to their three inter-communicating rooms the prisoners were led under 
heavy guard; and, true to his word, Nerado made certain that they had no more 
opportunities to escape. "I'm afraid, Steve. . er. . " 

"Just a minute--going over this once will be enough. Entlore that we're. No 
Gunther starship could ever, possibly, work. 

"Aren't you going to do something, Conway?" she cried. See where we're going, 
will you?" 

"We are about to strike the water," replied Crane quietly. 

"Well, I'm a. 

"That's it, Miss Bellamy. How long will the job take, and how much notice will 
you need?" 

"Two days, sir. Next time he pitches into her she'll slap his ears right off. 

Bang! Bam! Pow! The camouflage disappeared; so did the shrubbery for yards 
around. Maybe he believed what you always say just before or just after kicking 
somebody's teeth down their throats; that you're so meek and mild--a regular 
Milquetoast. The whole BuSci staff was in the lounge, watching the big tri-di. 
From our protected areas in North America a strong but democratic government 
can spread to cover the world. 

"And you said they were so hard-boiled," Doris said accusingly to Sam, nodding 
at the twins. 

"Not close enough to make out much detail yet--let's take another look at 
Saturn," and Stevens projected the visiray beam out toward the mighty planet. " 

Captain Bradley had stood by in silent astonishment during this conversation. 
"Why from me?" 

". Oxygen concentration a little high, but not much. " 

"Well, we got away alive, anyway. We're ready for George T. Everything of any 
importance, including all of your personal effects, has already been moved. " 

"Of course. 

"That explains several things about you--particularly your recognition of 
Vee-Two and your uncanny control and speed of reaction. " 

"I hope you don't think that way about _all_ Primes," Garlock said, grimly. You 
needn't bother about picking up your coat, they're both gone. Undisturbed for 
over two hundred seventy-one thousand years. . . a screen of that type was 
scarcely to have been expected from such a low form of life," Nerado commented, 
and began to adjust dials and controls. Your whole present policy is one of 
hiding and sniping. " 

"Smart!" Isaacson applauded. "I'm no blooming Englishman but in weather as hot 
as this I sure would like to dive into a good cold tank. Alcantro and Fedanzo 
will supervise the construction of the generators of the various fields from 
these calculations. 

Out of the vacuum of space a fish-shaped vessel of the void--the vessel that 
was to attack so boldly both the massed fleet of Triplanetary and Roger's 
planetoid--plunged into the rarefied outer atmosphere, and crimson beams of 
force tore shriekingly through the thin air as it braked its terrific speed. 
Thus, _in loco parentis_, we would be derelict indeed if we refused to act. " 

"I'll say they will. "Get that idea out of your head right now. " 

"What? You don't mean--you _can't_ mean that they--and by your thought, you 
Arpalones, too--are cannibals!" 

"Cannibals? Explain, please? Oh, eaters-of-our-own-species. They're watching 
this house. . " 

"Hi, Quincy! Hi, Norman!" a merry voice interrupted. "Figure it out. " 

The creature, now in the shadow of the 'Troncist's helmet, slowed down 
abruptly--went limp--collapsed. "The priests have taken Rhoann and are about to 
give her to Sarpedion!" 

"They can't, sire. However, by the time they can land and get checked up and 
ready to hunt for us, we'll be a mighty small needle, well hidden in a good big 
haystack. Everybody wanted to go, and there threatened to be trouble over the 
selection, so we picked the highest ratings from the whole Service. As he 
finished, he drew himself along by a handrail to one of the windows, then to 
another. Are you ready for a terrible shock, sir?" 

"Shoot. . . . . . . . " 

"Fao!" Delcamp exclaimed, "Please keep still--_please_!" 

"Let her rave," Garlock said, coldly. "They've got something--no fooling. As 
for solving mysteries, laugh while you can, old hyena. " 

"It may, at that. Will you resist?" 

"No. " 

She seized his elbow and hugged it quickly against her breast. " 

"I think Nerado will come in for a conference, and we'll be able to make terms 
of some kind. " 

"I understand. That's about how much ahead of us they probably are. Her price 
is high. . . " 

"But nothing can possibly go that fast, Mart, it's impossible. Every hundred 
years or so someone develops a new type of rocket that he thinks may stand a 
slight chance of making the journey, but not one of these venturesome youths 
has as yet returned. In a lower compartment of one of these enormous heptagons 
Vortel Kromodeor, First Projector Officer, rested before a gigantic and complex 
instrument board. We know they were around here a few weeks ago, and they're 
the only ones I know of that have intra-atomic power besides us and the 
Osnomians. 

"I think I can throw this thing straight enough and fast enough to chop off a 
Nevian's head before he can put a paralyzing ray on us," he explained grimly, 
but he was not called upon to show his skill with the improvised cleaver. " 

"Huh? What are you talking about? Impossible! Where are we, anyway? Then we 
must be making mil. "I know what you two men must of necessity be. Even though 
we can't use it intelligently, it certainly would be a winner as a defense. 
Reynolds Crane, everything would be ruined. . " 



In the _Perseus_, four scientists and three Navy officers were arguing 
heatedly; employing deep-space verbiage not to be found in any dictionary. 

"All set. . " 

"How about the fact that I've been banging myself for eight years against 
Cleander Garlock, the top Prime of the universe and the hardest? That might 
have something to do with it, don't you think?" 

Garlock said, "Indefensible conclusions drawn from insufficient data. Maybe we 
are. " 

The four remaining Primes looked at each other in puzzled surprise. Seaton 
suggested that they melt up some copper cable and other goods already 
manufactured, offering ten times their value, but the manager was obdurate, 
saying that he could not violate the rule of priority of orders. All Europan 
humanity, fully aware of the hexan investment, was exerting every possible 
precaution against discovery by the enemy. We must therefore assume that fuel 
shortage will not be a factor. Very little of their stuff got through--not 
enough, they say, to do much damage to a country as big as the U. This will 
require several months at best. As you already know, it has been decided that 
we should not return to any of the minor planets, as to do so might invite a 
hexan attack upon our police fleet which is as yet unprepared. Through the 
transparent walls they could see no sign of life, and DuQuesne donned a vacuum 
suit and stepped into the airlock. Under the impact of their beams, the 
stranger's screens had flared white, then poised ship and flying squadron had 
alike been lost to view in a murkily opaque shroud of crimson flame. They were 
too slow. He may not decide until the last moment. Keep on taking the shots, 
though; they'll prove, I think, that the universe is one whole hell of a lot 
bigger than anybody has ever thought it was. The thing, whatever it was, was 
now braking frantically with wings, tail, and body; trying madly to get away. 
It had always howled and screamed at its work, but now it gave out only a 
smooth and even hum. 

"All right. Can you and will you give me a chart of a routing from here to 
Palain Seven?" 

"I can and I will. " 

"Their eyes interpret colors differently than ours do," explained Seaton. " 
Belle glanced at him in surprise and he went on: "Not that we've seen, no. 
Until, about the middle of January, beautifully-phrased and 
beautifully-mimeographed letters began to arrive. 

"Just as an added factor of safety, you'd better put this on, Clio--those 
emergency suits aren't good for much in a battle. 

"It can't be done, Miss Vaneman. Cut off the decontaminators and in five hours 
it'll be as hot as the rest of the planet. Laro weighed at least five hundred 
pounds! And the guy _still_ looked human! 

Laro nodded again and gave himself a terrific thump on the chest. Personal 
belongings were moved into lifeboats, doors were closed, and there ensued a 
painful period of waiting and suspense. "If there's a chance for you to get 
away and do anything about fighting him, don't mind me. Enough of this 
argument! I am master here, and I am dictating terms. " 

"Coming up!" and in a few seconds they were there. Whee-ee-yerow!" 

Dorothy laughed, a gay, lilting carol. "It must be a kind of flat worm. There 
might have to be another interference, too, to get Tedric started along the 
right time-track. "' 

"What d'you mean 'if the next conjunction is _allowed_ to occur?'" interjected 
Seaton. . common decency. . . . . a subtle something for which your English has 
no word or phrasing. One man was assigned to each small subdivision of 
scientific endeavor, to study it intensively. Of what you call 'bravery' we 
have no trace. Every train and plane, every bus and boat and car, every 
conveyance of every kind and every pedestrian approaching New York City was 
searched; with a search as thorough as it was unobtrusive. " 

He did so, and over a hundred of the Patrol's shrewdest operatives--upon this 
occasion North America had invaded Eridan in force--studied and thought. She 
also carried First Lensman Virgil Samms. Why? I know we weren't together, but I 
got the impression, some way or other, that there was only the one. Yesterday, 
I was playing with it, transferring a section of my own brain to a magnetized 
tape--for a permanent record, you know--and found out that above certain rather 
low voltages it becomes a form of torture that would make the best efforts of 
the old Inquisition seem like a petting party. He knew that the voice was that 
of Sector A's Fire Control Officer, whose duty it was to determine, from 
courses, velocities, and all other data to be had from ground and lofty 
observers, the order in which his Sector's targets should be eliminated. " 



The approach was made, and the fourth planet out from that strange sun was 
selected as a ground. 

At this point Seaton made the captain take them all over the ship. Everybody, 
particularly the Nationalists, had wondered why this climactic political rally 
had been set for three full weeks ahead of the election, but their curiosity 
had not been satisfied. Eight of the huge rooms were now open and brightly 
lighted--operating the lamps had been one of the first items on the first spool 
of instructions--with a cold, pure-white, sourceless light. "What I wanted to 
say is, lead on. " 

"Very well. We have a perfectly wonderful chance as it is, and we've gone so 
far with our scheme together that it would be a crying shame not to be able to 
go through with it. . . " 

Out upon the dock an insistent siren blared a crescendo and diminuendo blast of 
sound, and two minutes remained. . if. K. , don't blow a fuse," Deston said, 
resignedly. " 

"That's because you aren't a girl," Jill giggled mentally. Would they kill them 
all, Dick? Surely they wouldn't--they _couldn't_. Our personnel is not 
expendable. But that can be ironed out as we go along. " 

"There'll be nothing doing here tonight, will there?" 

"No, it would be too noticeable. "The more I think of it the less I like it. 
The sleeping man muttered as if in protest at being disturbed, but made no 
other sign of consciousness. He had filed away every detail of what had just 
happened, and it had so many bizarre aspects that he could not think of 
anything else. Forgotten was his hunger, forgotten the power plant, forgotten 
everything except the fact that his Nadia, the buoyant spirit in whom centered 
his Universe, was lost or. Larry was waiting. And, even before the shift-boss 
had recovered full consciousness, he was walking down the drift toward Station 
Eleven. 

They start for Cantrell's Comet, where Stevens acquires the necessary material 
for his giant transmitting tube, heads back to Ganymede, when their ship is 
cut, top and bottom, by a strong ray-beam. " Gordon gritted his teeth in rage, 
but gave the order. You muckers, rig a couple of skoufers to throw muck to bury 
the base and checkerwork up to the hanging wall. " 

Straightening abruptly, the slave clamped several electrodes upon his temples 
and motioned to Seaton and the others, speaking to Dorothy as he did so. " 

"'Definite' and 'resounding,' yes. "It's in Zone Three already--collision 
course!" 

"Harper! Take over!" 

Kinnison got the data, solved the equations, launched five torpedoes at fifty 
gravities of acceleration. There were, however, a few Martians on the floor, 
wearing their light "robes du convention" and dancing with meticulously 
mathematical precision. He then called the General-in-Chief of the 
Interplanetary Police, requesting a detail of two hundred picked men for the 
hazardous venture. The ground was almost hidden by a rank growth of vegetation, 
but here and there appeared glade-like openings. As the density of the air 
increased so decreased the velocity of the man-made meteorite. . . " 

"Shut up, Jane! They won't hurt us any more than they have already; it's 
psychologically impossible. He could not possibly have done the job from 
Ardvor. Each of these was made general of his planet. It took a long time to 
work out this tight-beam transmission of power, but it was fairly simple after 
they got it. In fact-- 

"There may be a loop-hole in it," Lola said, thoughtfully. " Her mind joined 
his and he went on, "Ignore the machines themselves completely. Every crewman 
sprang to his post. Your reasoning seems to be that, whether the Masters wish 
it or not, you Omans will block any changes whatever in the _status quo_ 
throughout all time to come. It was never investigated by Congress and never 
raided by the police. "Not so good. No--not in cold blood. But you know damned 
well that you can't afford _any_. And I want to know about it as much as anyone 
else does. 

"But suppose she's Theodora?" Bernice had twitted her. Here they are. Nothing 
in the ether spectrum is corkscrewy enough to get through it. She took a few 
seconds to recover it. " 

"That's what I want to know. That would be in English. 

"It sure does," replied Scott, grinning. "Your existence proves that there is 
truth in mythology, as some of us have always believed. If you don't, when I 
count three I'll throw you out, and I won't be too careful about how many of 
your bones I break. But the field is so _big_--how do you expect to find him? 
Or do you know where he is?" 

"Uh-uh!" he denied, vigorously. Not one single damn one. Just kill 'em, don't 
scatter 'em all over hell's half acre--less mess to clean up and I _don't_ want 
you to kill people down below. But they must be wondering no end, outside, what 
the score is, so I'm willing to call it a draw--temporarily--and let 'em in 
again. Samms, intensely serious, spoke aloud to his friend: 

"The Galactic Council is now assembled. Good-bye, Alex; and thanks. With these 
we can guide you and explain the plants to you as you work, and our tractor 
beams will be of assistance to you in moving heavy objects, even at such 
distances from the surface as we Titanians shall have to maintain. A hard knee 
took one in the solar plexus; a hard elbow took the other so savagely under the 
chin as to all but break his neck. 

"I don't think so. I never thought of it that way. That road had been 
crowded--jammed. " 

"I am neither. She arched her eyebrows and spoke aloud--"why, I haven't the 
_faintest_ idea!" 

"Of course not. Keeping his projector upon the pirate, he seized the first club 
to hand--a long, slender pedestal of metal--launched himself past the pirate 
chief. Knowing the dimensions of this, our galaxy, you can readily understand 
the exact degree of precision required to hold upon a point at its outermost 
edge. At first the Chief Line Inspectors simply could not believe; but after 
the affair of the forty millimeter, in which Kinnison rammed the decision of 
his subordinate past Keller, past the General, past Stoner and Black, and clear 
up to the Commanding Officer before he made it stick, they were his to a man. 
Dorothy almost liked him, but Margaret insisted that she considered him worse 
than ever. . . . he wasn't fit to live on the same planet with her, but. 

"Ha! Help--I hear footsteps approaching on jet-back," Garlock announced. We 
pilots are having one sweet time--we're being growled at on every trip. 

"Adrenalin! Massage! Massage hell out of him!" 

Kinnison again came to--partially to, rather--anguished in every fiber of his 
being. Methinks I may be--Oh, the veriest trifle!--out of condition. "In other 
words, do we or do we not attain a maximum? You're making some bum assumptions; 
among others that space isn't curved and that the dimensions of the universe 
are very large compared to the length of our jumps. The fourth was pursuing 
something, which Seaton now saw was a fleet of small airships, which had flown 
away from the scene of conflict. There are literally miles and miles of film in 
each of those reels, and I see that there is a magazine full of reels in the 
cabinet. Pollice verso. Death. The strained and strident yelling of the mob 
grew even louder. Then he spoke--not softly, but in parade-ground tones audible 
to everyone present. Therefore, after we get a ship armed to suit us, we'll 
visit this strange planet and either come to terms with them or else steal a 
ship from them. But when they get it licked they'll _have something_!" 

"When, or if?" asked Bradley, pessimistically. "It is of the utmost importance 
that we know every detail of what is going to happen. Our two races have much 
to gain from each other by friendly exchanges of materials and of ideas, while 
we can expect nothing except mutual extermination if we elect to continue this 
warfare. "I don't think that he's insane, and I don't believe that he 
dopes--probably overwork and nervous strain. Ferber undoubtedly knows that 
Belle and I have been at loggerheads ever since we first met--spread it thick 
that we're fighting worse than ever. " 

"Even though I am a lawyer, and old and decrepit, I can still handle that much. 
" 

"I see. " The scientist's mind had been quivering with eagerness. " 

"You _do_ get results, I admit. " 

"Could be. Take half the Royal Guard and a century of bowmen. Second because 
our mirrors, which we had thought perfect reflectors of all frequencies 
possible of generation, are not perfect. Two of us stand a lot better chance 
than one of licking him if he's looking for trouble. But before we speculate 
too much, let's look at the tri-di. Once the arenak collar is cast about a 
person's neck he is identified for life, and any adult Osnomian not wearing a 
collar is put to death. . I hope. " 

"You probably are wrong," his host made startling answer. 

"Check. 

"The first thing to do is to find a place to land. "That was savage stuff if 
there ever was any. I will spread the word, through several channels. 

"All that we found is here, except about a teaspoonful which the expert had to 
work on," replied Brookings. Up and into the ring thus formed there lumbered a 
large, clumsy-looking helicopter. His right hand, white-knuckled, gripped the 
butt of his pistol, while under his left the brass rail of the bed slowly bent 
under the intensity of his unconscious muscular effort. And of course they've 
got intra-atomic energy the same as we have. 

"We should be nearly stationary with respect to the earth," he remarked. 
Perhaps they had more power than we, perhaps, because of the difficulty of 
communication, our want was not made clear to them. "That stuff up there is all 
grinding together like cakes of ice in a floe; the particular section you want 
is in plain sight of whoever is on watch; and those tools and things are 
altogether too heavy to handle. In the control room, however, there was a 
platoon of elite guards, clustered so closely about the commander and his 
officers that needles could not be used; a group that would have to be wiped 
out by hand. The Rodebush-Bergenholm fields had held her together through the 
most God-awful session of saturation atomic bombing that any world had ever 
seen or that the mind of man had ever conceived. Much traffic and interbreeding 
followed between the hexans of Jupiter and those of Io, resulting in time in a 
race intermediate in size between the parent stocks and equally at home in the 
widely variant air pressures and gravities of planet and satellite. 

Nor was Nerado alone in strengthening his vessel. "You mean you can _restore_ 
planets so badly ruined that all the people die?" 

"Oh, yes. In the exact center of the huge shell was a spherical network of 
enormous steel beams. Physical form, however, meant nothing to the Eddorians. 
Now we can act like human beings and eat in comfort. But go ahead, Dickie, I 
like it--this is the first uproar you've made in weeks. Hence, while the course 
itself was infinitely worse than the smoothly paved approaches to Rigelston, 
Samms found this trip much less bruising than the other had been. "I know how 
you two have been getting on all during the cruise. There. 

"These men are already acquainted with each of you, but you do not as yet know 
them. " 

"You isolate a little energy in the Op field, remembering of course, that 
you're handling a hundred thousand gunts. 

"I love you, Dick. 

Danger--more serious by far in that it was not external--was even then, all 
unsuspected, gnawing at the great ship's vitals. Such as solid people appearing 
on this carpet--on that spot right there--instantaneously. " 

"The good old oil, eh?" Morgan allowed his face and voice to register a 
modicum, precisely metered, of contempt. I'd say the best split would be 
planetology, xenology, and anthropology--each, of course, stretched all out of 
shape to cover dozens of related and non-related specialties. They believe that 
the slaves are so low in the scale, millions of years behind in evolution, that 
they do not count. Since the rank and file knew it, everyone knew that only a 
fraction of the Black fleet had actually been destroyed; but nobody knew where 
the remaining vessels went or what they did. " 

"Good-by, clothes!" Beverly rolled over onto her back, fanned water carefully 
with her hands, and gazed approvingly at herself. They, too, had ultra-beams 
and might see him, but his very closeness to them would tend to protect him 
from ultra-beam observation. " 

"Tedric, I approve of you--you begin to think!" Much to the young man's 
surprise, Phagon smiled broadly. There are only two men in the United States, 
or in the world, for that matter, with brains enough and information enough to 
work it out. " 

"That's letting me down easy, Jarve. " An inaudible voice directed him toward a 
two-wheeled vehicle which was almost, but not quite, like a Dillingham 
roadster. I don't 'handle' them--they can't be 'handled'. " 

"Everyone in the palace heard you discovering it," dryly returned Crane, and 
the girls laughed merrily. But often they assembled in the engine-room, and 
there was much fun and laughter, as well as serious talk, among the four. 

"Keep still!" he snapped. "How do you want it; voice, or Lens, or both?" Then 
on the Lens: "Think it over, son, because _I suspect everybody_!" 

"Bub-both, please, Mr. 

"You certainly sounded savage, Dick. I'll take the trip. He came in grinning 
from ear to ear, accompanied by the two Martians, and seated himself at his 
complex power panel. 

"I've heard of them, of course, but I never saw one before," and the officer 
touched the shining symbol lightly with his finger, jerking backward as there 
shot through his whole body a thrilling surge of power, shouting into his very 
bones an unpronounceable syllable--the password of the Triplanetary Service. 
"My visualization does not indicate that it will ever again be either necessary 
or desirable for you to visit or to communicate with me or with any other 
Arisian. " Cold black eyes stared level into icy eyes of Norwegian blue. But 
what's the idea?. "Breasts and loins, covered. Beautifully poised, upon the 
balls of both feet; supremely ready to throw into action every inch of his 
six-feet-four, every pound of his two-hundred-plus of hard meat, gristle, and 
bone. So who's Barbara Warner?" 

Eddie Thompson gazed at his superior pityingly. None of us really enjoys 
polishing brass or washing dishes--and besides, he's one star cook and an A-1 
housekeeper. I've got more stuff than you have, so you can't Gunther me. Good 
night. " 

"Good night, ace. I wouldn't wonder if----" 

"Hold it, Dicky! Remember I had to put you to bed after that last hunch you 
had!" 

"Here it is, anyway. "Exactly. Go on. If I hadn't meant it, and if they hadn't 
known that I meant it, I'd never have got away with it. 

"All's well, sir," he reported briefly to Captain Bradley--but all was not 
well. Wherever you go, I go," she replied in a voice inaudible to the others. 

"They suspect me on general principles, I think," he continued. . of _course_ 
that would be the one they'd use in sacrificing a king's daughter. Dirk and 
saber and magnificent physique finally triumphed, but it was not until each 
leaf was literally severed from every other leaf that the outlandish organism 
gave up the ghost. Carfon stepped out, opened the door of his house, and 
preceded his guests within. No survivors have been found, no bodies have been 
recovered. "The electricians can rebuild this stuff here, though--that hole in 
the hull is something else again. The players were projectors of full-color, 
hi-fi sound, tri-di pictures. "Would you, Jim?" 

"Sure--unless Miss Talaho objects. She stared back. 

And aboard the war-ship there was Roderick Kinnison; for the first time in 
history a mere battle-cruiser bore a Port Admiral's flag. As it hardened, the 
paste smoothed magically into the perfect mirror which covered the 
space-vessels of the satellite; and a full dozen of the mirror explosive bombs 
of this strange people were hung in the racks already provided. Had Nalboon met 
them in honor, he would have gained the boon. It had been foreseen. In that 
condition its pseudo-life interferes so strongly with any life to which it is 
not attuned that that life, in a space of seconds, is forced out of this plane 
or cycle of existence. That covers the situation, I think?_" 

"_Very good, Eukonidor," the Elders approved. "I begin to see, I think. 

Sawtelle drove a thought and those brutal super-drives began to blast. Come 
here, Quince--what do you make of this?" 

Both men stared at the heptagon, frankly puzzled; for the screens of the 
strange vessel did not radiate, nor did the material of the walls yield under 
the terrible force of the beam. 

This was now to be changed. "They'll all scatter out so fast and so far we'll 
_never_ catch them!" 

"By no means. " 

"I don't know exactly what you're talking about, sir, but I'll try. We must 
have at least one of your tons, and two tons would be better. You'll simply 
_have_ to, Conway!" 

"That's so, too--no percentage in dying now. "You aren't putting out anything 
about our sexual customs, family life, and so on. "His administration was one 
of the most corrupt ever known on this world. Are they apt to follow us: can 
they detect us if we should drift at constant velocity; and can we search the 
brains of the prisoners with his Callistonian thought-exchanger, if he should 
build one with our help?" 

"If they are close enough to us to overtake us without too much lost time, they 
will certainly attack us," Czuv answered at a nod from Newton. The profound 
silence, more impressive far than any possible applause, was soon broken by 
Dorothy. 

"Sweetheart, you are undoubtedly a 'warm number,' and you have often remarked 
that I 'burn you up. And a dozen or so other craft, cruisers and such, whose 
officers were out to put space-time in their logs, were flitting aimlessly 
about; but never very far away from the flagship. The blast expired and there, 
plainly limned upon the observation plates, was the Nevian speedster. I know 
that my reputation is safe as long as I work with you, because I know enough 
about you to send all you big fellows, clear down to Perkins, away for life. 
Flight Eight Four Nine. Six. First-line battleships, twenty-nine. Second-line, 
smaller and some pretty old, seventy-three. Its atmosphere is not air as we 
know air; its hydrosphere does not resemble water. Our watery planet supplies 
our every need and wish, with one exception; and now that we are assured of 
power, even that one exception vanishes, and Dasor becomes a very Paradise. I 
intend to make the same suggestion to all Lensmen and other qualified persons 
not engaged in work of more pressing importance. From these three postulates 
the conclusion can be drawn that there has come into existence a new race. 
Above their heads, a jagged hole gaped in the heavy metal of the roof, and a 
similar hole had been torn in the floor. " 

"Not this time, at least. . . . . bub. . . ?" 

"Dead. " Samms' voice cut. "I owe you that much revenge, at least. . . I 
certainly don't do it intentionally. No king of Lomarr could possibly break 
that particular precedent. Good--it was out. He wasn't surprised; he had been 
quite confident that it would be. I will never see you except after hours and 
in private, and will never come near your offices. 

"Isn't it wonderful, lover," she murmured, "to be out here in space this way, 
together, away from all our troubles and worries? I am so happy. No fight," and 
she emptied her lungs. To the dismay of both men they were again falling! 

DuQuesne hurried to the lower window to make the observation, remarking: 

"You're a better man than I am, Gunga Din. 

"I didn't expect an answer. "You aren't testing those valves! That check-up is 
no joke, guy. If we go back there, protected as we are with our rays and stuff, 
it wouldn't surprise me a bit to find life there, and lots of it--and I've got 
a hunch that it'll be a form of life that'd make your grandfather's whiskers 
curl right up into a ball!" 

"You do get the weirdest ideas, Dick!" protested Dorothy. His thick skin was of 
the characteristic Osnomian green and his eyes were the usual black, but he had 
no hair whatever. 

"Get me Spearmint. Hilton tipped the beam at four thousand six hundred fifteen 
pounds; Sawtelle, a smaller man, weighed in at four thousand one hundred 
ninety. Sandwiches and a thermos of coffee. So either I run the job or I don't. 
" 

"Okay. I'll tell Brownie--she'll be tickled. It would keep everything, 
particularly the big stuff, away from the Hill, and would make automatics 
useless. He was tall and well-proportioned when judged by Earthly standards, 
except for his head, which was overly large, and which was particularly massive 
above the eyes and backward from the ears. 

"Brandon's ultra-radio comes next, but it's got more angles to it than a 
cubist's picture of a set of prisms; so many that I don't know where to begin. 
All we know about it is the name--Arisia--that our planetographers gave it. 
Free of the earth's atmosphere, he slowly advanced the lever, one notch at a 
time, until he could no longer support the increasing weight of his hand, but 
had to draw out the rolling support designed for that emergency. If he refused 
to answer, you would know why and could initiate impeachment proceedings then 
and there. You're right, Rod, it will be the election. I told you I was a 
prophet--I'm going to hang out my shingle. 

"This is an outrage!" he bellowed, hammering with his fist on Avengord's desk. 
Sorry to get you out of bed, but I should like to have a complete report upon 
Dr. "You haven't one-twentieth of it here. The _Pleiades_ was crowded, and 
Garlock and Belle were not giving to any of them the deference and 
consideration and submissive respect which each considered his unique due. 

"I'm on the upper band--take the lower!" he snapped, but Stevens' projector was 
already in action. 

"The Councillor and I have just been discussing the fact that there are a great 
many things we do not know; that with the extension of our activities into new 
fields, the occurrence of the impossible has become almost a commonplace. We 
have forgotten nothing. Right?" 

"That is right, Master. . . . So what I am is some kind of a freak. This is all 
his doing, you know. " 

Since the new sense was not peyondix, Hilton had started calling it 
"perception" and the others adopted the term as a matter of course. Our chance 
is this--their guns are probably trained upon the elevators and main stairways, 
since this passage is unused and none of us would be expected to know of it. 
The screen was apparently in itself a coign of vantage, flying through space 
with the velocity of light, and the watchers gasped involuntarily and drew 
themselves together, as with that unthinkable speed they flashed down toward 
the surface of Callisto. They withdrew, tracelessly. " 

"Do you know why?" 

"Can't say that I do, unless it's because I treat them fair, so they do the 
same to me. But the Tellurians were to learn that the Nevians held in reserve a 
means of retreat. Every night when Crane went to bed he saw Seaton in his room 
in a haze of smoke, poring over blueprints or, surrounded by abstruse works 
upon the calculus and sub-atomic phenomena, making interminable calculations. 
Our projections are useless, as they can be driven only a very short distance 
upon our present carrier wave. What other streets could it be?" 

"I don't know. " 

Having thus checked and tested every function of his department, Breckenridge 
plugged into "Captain," and when the green light went on: 

"Chief pilot check-out--all x," he reported briefly. " 

Hilton spoke before Teddy could. " 

"I am? On what?" 

"The 'Brazen'. The battle-front, while inside the city limits, was now almost 
stationary. Some of the color-combinations were harmonious; some were sharply 
contrasting, such as black and white; some looked as though their wearers had 
used the most violently-clashing colors they could find. Your method of 
indirect action is probably the only one that will succeed. 

"How are you making it, Mart?" he asked, talking with difficulty because of the 
great weight of his tongue and jaws. 

The banner was that of a priest of the third rank. Both were too small for the 
job; neither could handle personnel. " 

"All right with me. "I've never been checked out on sprinting in spacesuits!" 
she gasped. This device that you see connecting us is a Callistonian thought 
transformer, by means of which any two intelligent beings can converse without 
language. If you could get through this grill, you could cut off my head with 
your sword and I would die. 

All personal haste was now over. They're smart. Their pseudo-flesh is composed 
mainly of silicon and fluorine. It's just that I don't like the conditions. He 
slowed down to just over one light; but even at that comparatively slow speed 
an error of one millisecond at cut-off meant a displacement of two hundred 
miles! He switched the spotter into the Berg's cut-off circuit, set it for 
three hundred miles, and waited tensely at his controls. They practiced with 
the rays, singly and in combination, with the visiplates, and with the many 
levers and dials, until each was so familiar with the complex installation that 
his handling of every control had become automatic. Nor, in case any observer 
of the Enemy should be trying to keep track of him, could his course be traced. 
Because of this lack, the Sedlor walls were weakened to such a point that in 
spite of the Guardian's assurances, I think trouble is inevitable. However, I 
can't handle either of you, since you both out-Gunther me, and I'm not going to 
try to. 

"Stall four sixty five, First Lensman, sir," the uniformed gateman told him, 
without even glancing at the extended disk. "Or is it something I should not 
mention?" 

"What? Oh, those? By no means. "But you see, Nadia hadn't seen that husband of 
hers for fifteen minutes, and was getting lonesome. "Bread! A whole loaf each 
man a day?" 

"Aye," Phagon had chuckled in reply. 











Costigan was not surprised to see the man he had known as Birkenfeld in 
Uranium's ornate conference room. 

"Tallick? Kragzex?" He sent out the questing, querying thought. 

"There they are! There's another stranger out there, too. " She opened a 
compartment and selected one of a stack of documents. . . . but Pops, you said 
something about 'support in force. " 

Seaton steered the _Skylark_ carefully, surrounded as she was by a tightly 
packed crowd of swimmers, to the indicated dwelling, and anchored her so that 
one of the doors was close to a flight of steps leading from the corner of the 
building down into the water. "Talk ahead as loud as you please--they can't 
hear you. " She hugged Hilton's arm as usual. "She's hot and ready. " 

"You won't bring _any_!" Sawtelle thundered. 

"Life again," James said. I sleep a lot, but I do it every night, instead of 
working for four days and nights on end and then trying to make up all those 
four nights' sleep at once. Through the open port the boat slipped neatly, and 
as it came to a halt in its original position within the multi-layered skin of 
the monster, the prisoners heard the heavy doors clang shut behind them, one 
after another. Each ship went off by itself. What quality did you use just now 
in getting me off the hook? Intuition. In fact, every planet we have visited 
except this one makes a regular custom of breeding its best blood with the best 
blood of other solar systems. The last vessel going to visit Wruszk, our city 
upon Europa, was caught and destroyed by the hexans, and for many weeks no ship 
or message has come from there to Callisto. 

"That is what awaits us all unless we combine against them. "Do you call that 
horrible wound a _scratch_?" 

"Huh? Why, certainly--that's all it is--thanks to you," he returned, in honest 
and complete surprise. Rising, he took his regular morning exercises and went 
into the saloon. Snapping on a searchlight, he swung its beam around, and as it 
settled upon one of the larger sections he saw a group of hooded figures; some 
of them upon the metal, others floating slowly toward it through space. Ferdy 
will probably draw on me----" 

"And he'll kill you," Jones said, flatly. "Whether or not I would be interested 
depends, of course, on whether there's a position high enough for. Wherever you 
may be upon Kondalian Osnome, which from this day henceforth shall be all 
Osnome, you have power as my personal representative, as my eldest son. What is 
your name, Lord? I can't keep on calling you 'strange god' forever. . . . 
musical, say. . " 

Sirens wailed and screamed outside. "My uncle's cousin's stepson is running for 
second assistant dog-catcher, and I can't leave until I find out whether he 
wins or not. In some small and partial recompense for what they are doing for 
us all, he and I are going with Captain Czuv to Callisto, there to see whether 
or not we can aid them in any way in the fight against the hexans. "Too many 
instruments for a suit, to say nothing of bombs, and you'll need more screen 
than a suit can deliver. We licked her to a standstill once, until we burned 
out a set of generators, and since we got them fixed we've been chasing her all 
over space. " Costigan could not afford to appear stupid, nor to possess too 
much knowledge. We're on our own, you know. " Kinnison knew that combat 
officers did not wear hobnails, and usually carried binoculars. "How come so 
many at once?" 

"Just about all the officers that got this far. Eventually, however, it 
remained stationary a foot or so above the floor of the control-room. He then 
leaped to the controls and drove the captured speedster through the air, to 
plunge it down upon the surface of the lagoon beside the door of the isolated 
structure which had for so long been his prison. You're stronger than Jim is by 
a lot more than the Prime-to-Operator ratio--you've got more initiative, more 
drive, more guts. 

Therefore the Arisians fought; efficiently if insidiously. Beams, rods, and 
lances of energy flamed and flared; planes and pencils cut, slashed, and 
stabbed; defensive screens glowed redly or flashed suddenly into intensely 
brilliant, coruscating incandescence. Why? The Masters had the same kind of 
brains we have. 

Roger's first thought, upon discovering what tremendous and inexplicable damage 
had already been done, was to destroy instantly the two men who were doing it. 

Up and up mounted that powerful tug-boat of space, with her heavy barge, 
falling smoothly upward at normal acceleration. Finally Crane spoke, his 
usually even voice faltering. If he is killed before the principles for which 
he is working are firmly established Civilization will collapse back into 
barbarism. 

"What an evolution! Century after century of slowly decreasing temperature--one 
continuous struggle to adapt the physique to a constantly changing environment. 
And as they strolled along: 

"Of course you won't actually _need_ a job, ever, or my money, either. " 

"I'll say we could," Belle breathed. "They knew we were coming, even before we 
got to Fuel Bin. 

"Is it the radiation or the water? Or both?" 

"Radiation, I think. 

How even those silicon-fluorine brains stood it, not one of them ever knew. " 

"But I don't know any more about astronomy than a pig does about Sunday," 
protested Seaton. He told them exactly what the revised situation was and 
exactly what he was going to do about it. " 

"But that is not exactly it, Master. Why not?" 

"Well, it would be stretching the laws of probability all out of shape. 

"Now we will show you where we sleep," Seaton continued. " 

"Why not?" he asked wonderingly, then he saw her point and laughed: 

"You little matchmaker!" 

"I don't care, laugh if you want to. We'll finish as soon as possible. No, I 
haven't looked for the comet yet, because we'll have to drift for a couple of 
days before we'll be anywhere near where I think it is. Instead of being glum 
and pessimistic and foreboding, he was chipper and enthusiastic. Gaping wide, 
helpless, with all defenses down, other torpedoes entered the stricken hulk and 
completed its destruction even before they could be recalled. " 

"What are you two talking about?" Sawtelle demanded. You say that that method 
has failed. Forget 'em. Fourth Officer Olmstead has the authority and the 
orders to put a half-ounce slug through the guts of any or all of you that 
don't jump, and jump fast, to do what he tells you. "Lola, do you check me that 
this planet is named Hodell, that it is populated by creatures exactly like us? 
Arpalones?" 

"Exactly, except they aren't 'creatures'. " 

"I cannot understand. I wish you really meant that, ace. Everything is hidden 
from any possible visiray of the hexans. The brightly-shining sun was very 
evidently not their familiar Sol. Nothing was ornamental--everything was 
stripped to its barest fundamental necessities--but every working part 
functioned with a smooth precision to delight the senses of any good mechanic. 
Fields or cities there were none; the land was covered with dense forests and 
vast meadows, with here and there great buildings surrounded by gracious, 
park-like areas. 

"Sid!" he called, and even Jill could feel the Lensed thought speed. Fourth, 
and perhaps the most feasible and quickest, it may be possible for the 
Callistonian rocket-ships to bring out fellow-Tellurians, a few at a time, to 
us here out in space, since they are apparently able to come and go at will. 
No, they've got a real power-transmission system--one that can hold a tight 
beam together a lot farther than anything we have been able to develop, that's 
all. Of course I wasn't surprised when his searchers failed to find our 
instruments, but it never occurred to me that I might have a clear field to use 
them in! I can't quite believe it yet, but I haven't been able to find any 
indication that he can even detect the bands we are using. There were thoughts 
of powdering noses and of repairing make-up. Seaton has liberated it. " 

The creature, now in the shadow of the 'Troncist's helmet, slowed down 
abruptly--went limp--collapsed. We can go anywhere that thing can, that's a 
cinch. " 



The party appeared, Crane carrying the huge rocket with an air of deference. 
The screen was already loaded to its limit; no transfer of defensive energy was 
possible. 

"Everybody is under cover," Samms informed Rodebush. . " 

"Handle!" interrupted DuQuesne. Art in the forefront of those few I spoke of. 

Perhaps it would be better to say that the planet Strett became a junior-grade 
nova, since the actual nova stage was purely superficial and did not last very 
long. "Where? Over Margon Base?" 

"Check. We also brought along an assortment of books I knew you would be 
interested in, a box of radium, a few small bags of gems of various kinds, and 
some of our fabrics, Sitar thought your Karfediro would like to have. I have, 
however, certain ends of my own in view. Since our courts are, for the most 
part, just, the accused will be able to delay the trials and the actual 
presentation of evidence until after election day. It would be mildly amusing 
to watch the gladiator consummate his vengeance by carving the Roman to bits. 

"I just love to talk at you when you've got your mouth full of a blowpipe. " 

"How do you know whether I'm a virgin or not? You've never read me that deep. 
"It nearly did us. He was here only on a test. Don't read anything into it that 
isn't there. " 

"It isn't fast enough, quite," Bradley announced, calmly. He'll have to. We 
must do all the damage we can--kill them all, if possible--in that second or 
two. 

Thus the departure of the space-ship from Cavenda was recorded, as was its 
arrival at Eridan. The Sory, no longer Sora, who has not been glad since the 
Tuly replaced it, is now in your kitchen. If they are marrying for any reason 
at all other than love, such as any thought of trifling in the mind of the man, 
or if the woman is marrying him for his wealth or position, he or she is 
summarily executed, regardless of station. " 

"Of course you won't--that's why you are going. We all do. " 

"You have outlined the situation clearly enough, Faros. Well, we can do that, 
too, of course. Here comes Barkovis--I'll ask him. He must know the signal and 
who is going to operate, and if you can give us a fraction of a second of 
warning it will help no end. The wall was one vertical plate of seamless metal, 
supporting huge metal guides, between which floated metal pontoons. "We are not 
going to have ten years; we may not have ten months. Tiny, let's you and him 
sit down now and play a few hands. Not one of us four could do it any better. 
The outlaw vessel stood out, unharmed. " She broke the pose and giggled 
infectiously. " 

"Oh, of course," Fao said. " 

"That one I'll buy, and I'll look on with glee. He did not know the exact 
length of Seven's year, but he knew that it was long--_very_ long. I sort of 
expect an answer late tonight, but I won't be disappointed if it takes a week 
to locate them. But now the space-suited warriors of the horde, guided in their 
hiding by their own visirays, were massing there. " 

"Seaton will, you mean," replied Crane, uncomfortably. But she told me herself 
that you were _going_ to be, and I know you are now. . 
