you little realize, youth, what a priceless opportunity this will be for me to 
check the accuracy of my visualization. I shall spend many periods upon the 
problem. It was mathematically certain that, when the Gunther field went on, 
the ship would be displaced instantaneously to some location in space having 
precisely the Gunther coordinates required by that particular field. Eleven 
deeply tanned young men emerged from it and made their way to a taxi stand, 
where each engaged a separate vehicle. 

Sam Bryant stepped into his cab, gave the driver a number on Oakwood Avenue in 
Des Plaines, and settled back to scan. He was lucky. " 



Stevens' fears were only too well grounded, for during the "evening" of the 
following day, while he was carefully scanning the heavens for some sign of 
enemy craft, the alarm bell over his head burst into its brazen clamor. 

"Hold it, everybody!" Hilton yelled. "Tedric, ashore!" 

"Canst swim, Lord Tedric?" the boss asked. 

"Strictly speaking, we cross it not, but float down it. " 

"That conclusion is indefensible!" Tula snapped. He got up, jammed his hands 
into his pockets, and began to pace the floor. 

"I pick my own company an' I drink what I damn please," Jones announced, 
grittily. "Them lunkers ain't hurt none, to speak of. Goddard's pupils and 
followers made bigger and better rockets, and finally got one that could land 
safely upon Mars. " 

"Meteoric swarms still too numerous for safe travel along the scheduled route," 
came promptly from the speaker. 

"Murf? Spud? How come?" Clio, practically recovered now, glanced upward 
questioningly. 

"That would have surprised me tremendously yesterday; but after today--I'll 
tell you about that presently--it doesn't. " 

"I'm glad of that. That many parsecs, at least. The power is just what we 
figured it, so immensely large as to be beyond belief. I have found: 

"First: That it is a practically irresistible _pull_ along the axis of the 
treated wire or bar. 

"Well, that sure wins the----" 

An alarm bell sounded. All listened intently, learning that a freight-plane was 
being pursued by a karlon a few hundred miles away. The whole line of empty 
cars, acting in perfect synchronization, shot forward one space and stopped. We 
have laws," here he looked at the members of Congress and the judge, "which can 
be enforced. The conditions I mentioned would be difficult at the moment, since 
so few of us are here and it is manifest that few if any of our people will 
believe that such people as you Galaxians really exist. 



But to Neal Cloud the accident was the ultimate catastrophe. On Time Track 
Number One, that was the immutable result. That ship there is far from 
innocent--her being so far out of range of any of our power-plants proves that. 
But what I want to know is, how'd you get here? It would take more than my 
brains--you can't see our sun from anywhere near Osnome, even if you knew 
exactly where to look for it. Here, we'd better keep in touch. Anyway, such 
little, tiny, sisterly ones as this, and out in public, don't count. 

"There's no life left underground, so you needn't keep this squad of gunners 
tied up here," Garlock told the commander. " 

"She just thinks you ain't. I don't know what I'm going to do; I'll have to 
roll it as I go along. If we run away from them they'll probably reverse power 
and go back home, won't they? Their beam is falling apart fast, but they're 
still getting so much stuff along it that we couldn't do a thing to stop them. 
"We'll hold this lump of metal and the fragment of the ship carrying the salt; 
and we'll be able to hold some of the most important of the other stuff. How 
about the _Bolivar_ and the _Himalaya_? Not having much luck catching Mr. 
Garlock for the duration of his stay on Margonia?" 

"Oh, _yes_, sir!" she replied, excitedly. 

"You are so assigned. 

"Target Forty-one--six," said Fire Control; and: 

"Lawrence, two. " Clio laughed again, but sobered quickly. The Tellurian worlds 
of Procyon and Vega became friendly neighbors--thank God we learned something 
on Nevia--because they were already inhabited by highly advanced races: Procia 
by people as human as we are, Vegia by people who would be so if it weren't for 
their tails. Many other worlds of these systems are inhabited by more or less 
intelligent non-human races. 

Thus, at the pinpoint in history represented by the time of Virgil Samms and 
Roderick Kinnison, the Eddorians were busy; and if such a word can be used, 
happy. " 

"It's all of that, sweetheart mine!" 

"I almost died, every time they shot at you. . " he paused, searching through 
his scanty store of Earthly knowledge, then went on, doubtfully, "perhaps some 
thing like your insects. They developed a sort of intelligence, and because of 
their fecundity, adapted themselves to their environment as readily as did man; 
and for ages they threatened man's supremacy upon Titan. 

"Why, I don't see a thing, Steve--where and what is it?" They were dropping 
vertically downward toward the center of a vast plain of white, featureless and 
desolate; and Nadia stared in disappointment. 

"You'll see directly--it's too good to spoil by telling you what to look for or 
wh. . . . " 



As he spoke, the mighty fabric lurched under them, and only their quick and 
powerful tails, darting in lightning loops about the bars, saved them from 
being battered to death against the walls as the heptagon was hurled end over 
end by a stupendous force. You _can_ relax a little, I see. Thanks. Wilt keep. 
. . . . . . . . . you could be right?" For the first time since the "ghastly" 
transformation Hilton saw that there really was a bright side and began to 
study it. I've _got_ to. This landing is going to be tough. Slide around here a 
little, so I can get hold of you. When he was talking to you you must have 
noticed a sort of rough, sandpapery feeling under that necklace I gave you? 
Since he's got an ether-wall around you the beads are dead now. I will put on 
power until this bar is something less than half gone, then coast for three or 
four days. That gives us eighty-two days before the torpedo gets there--longer 
than I'd dared hope. " All high-tension apparatus was shielded and grounded, so 
that no stray impulses could reveal to the possible detectors of the Jovians 
the presence of this foreign power plant. Just as they have it completed and 
ready to start for Cantrell's Comet, where Stevens believes he can obtain the 
necessary metal for his giant transmitting tube, they experience a close call 
with carnivorous plants on the satellite and later with savage inhabitants, 
which precipitates their trip to the comet. It goes through space, gets near 
enough to the earth to be seen, and then goes off and disappears in celestial 
distance. That, of course, sets up a barrier against any frequency of the 
blanketed band. All x. I'll have supper ready for you at sunset. Be advised, 
therefore; fight no more until you know who pays. Wouldst any more of you be 
split like white-fish ere I go? Time runneth short, but I would stay and oblige 
if pressed. " 

He was not pressed. 

Tedric whirled and strode away. High above their heads the mirror again 
encompassed Seaton, and again shot upward and southward. Five times this 
maneuver was repeated before Seaton came down, landing easily in front of them 
and opening his helmet. 

"What do you think you're going to do in that thing, Dickie?" Dorothy called. 
We ourselves will operate through forms of flesh of no higher intelligence 
than, and indistinguishable from, the natives of the planets affected. They did 
not even explode. Good thing it didn't go off any sooner, or none of us would 
have been here. " 

She continued more slowly, almost speaking to herself, her heart sinking with 
her voice: 

"He is following us, and he won't stop even if he does see this dead star and 
knows that he can't get away. 

"Now's the time for you to study one, Dunark!" Seaton exclaimed. "You've been 
gone four hours, eleven minutes, and forty one seconds, but never mind about 
abstract theorizing. Get back here, to Pittsburgh, as fast as you can drive. 

Number Ten was another queer--the Tellurians were found incompatible. 

"Let's go down anyway. So you can wipe that off your mind with a clear 
conscience--the rest of us will get everything they've got there. Trenco, they 
call it. . . . . . . I hate to say this, Clee. " 

"I'd like that. He wrenched his axe free and shoved the corpse away in such a 
direction that the reaction would send him against a wall at the floor line, in 
position to repeat the maneuver. 

Since Mason Northrop was heavier and stronger than his friend, his technique 
was markedly different. I'm a hundred times as strong as any man ever was. Then 
the Vorkul spoke, but his whistling, hissing manner of speech so garbled the 
barking sounds of the hexan words he was attempting to utter, that Verna's 
slight knowledge of the language was of no use. They generate an extremely 
short carrier wave, like the Millikan cosmic ray, by recombining some of the 
electrons and protons of their disintegrating metal, and upon this wave they 
impose a pure heat frequency of terrific power. Then the other fellow will 
revive and cut his off, for an observation. How's that?" 

"All right. But boys and girls were notoriously prone to accident and to 
debauchery. . . . . stopped. Samms, en rapport with the entity who was to be 
his escort, made a flashing survey of the mind so intimately in contact with 
his own. A tender expression came into Crane's steady blue eyes as he looked 
down at the beautiful young woman by his side. 

In due time the captain recovered consciousness, and slept. Then for days the 
speedster flashed on toward our distant solar system; days during which her 
wide-flung detector screens remained cold. We will install refrigerating 
machines at once. And if the absentee were not to be found on Earth, what of 
it? The First Galactic Region included all of the solar systems and all of the 
planets adherent to Civilization, and the absentee could, as a matter of 
business and duty, be practically anywhere. The Titanians can hold a beam 
together from Saturn to Jupiter--why can't these snake-folks?" 

"Several reasons," Brandon argued stubbornly. "First place, look at the mass of 
that thing, and remember that the heavier the beam the harder it is to hold it 
together. . " 

"Galactic Vice Admiral would be better," Lola said. . " he broke off and stared 
at her, his contemptuous gaze traveling slowly, dissectingly, from her toes to 
the topmost wave of her hair-do. 

"Forty-two, twenty, forty?" he sneered. "But the truth is that you know damned 
well I'll blow both of your ships out of space if you so much as. It's a matter 
of physical reserves. Jim and I have more to draw on for the long shifts than 
you have. No more talk of the money end of it, Dick. As an exhibition of 
perfect co-ordination and instantaneous timing under extreme physical 
difficulties, I have never seen its equal. 

"That is," he hastened to correct himself, "they are not all equal, either, as 
they have two classes which would rank with royalty--those who have attained to 
great heights of knowledge and those who have amassed great wealth. We expect 
no return whatever, but if you _should_ by some miracle happen to succeed, what 
then? Deep seas being made shallow, civilization extending itself over the 
globe, science advancing by leaps and bounds, Nevia becoming populated as she 
should be peopled--that, my friend, is a chance well worth taking!" 

The Secretary called in a group of guards, who escorted the small package of 
priceless metal to the space-ship. Before the massive door was sealed the 
friends bade each other farewell. 

". . . . . . . . . " he began. 

"Yeah, and they said a lot of even bigger damn lies than that one. The trip 
ended on the top floor of the towering Administration Building, in a 
heavily-screened room containing a desk, a couple of chairs, and a tremendously 
massive safe. That is, if Bergenholm is _sure_ that the duplication is close 
enough. Our development is hindered, our birth-rate must be held down to a 
minimum, many new cities which we need cannot be built and many new projects 
cannot be started, all for lack of power. But those qualities which you refer 
to as 'force' and 'drive' are fully as rare among us as absolute mental 
integrity is among you. " 

"You've got a point there, Jarve, at that, and I'm one of the few who know what 
kind of a job _you're_ doing, so I'll relax. " She flashed him a gamin grin and 
they went on into the control room. It opened, and four husky orderlies rapidly 
but gently encased the long body of the Vorkul in the space-suit built 
especially to receive it. He agrees with you and Kincaid that the psychological 
approach is the best one, but your methods are all wrong. It is true that I am 
acquainted with those others, but they are my enemies. Throwing himself down a 
vertical shaft, he flew toward a tiny projector-locker, in the lowermost part 
of one of the great star's points, the hexans in hot pursuit. He wrenched the 
door open, and even while searing planes of force were riddling his body, he 
trained the frightful weapon he had sought. He pressed the contact, and bursts 
of intolerable flame swept the entire passage clear of life. A little thing 
like a beating is not a fraction of what he deserves and it would show him that 
we have found him out. 

And then--it chanced to be daylight at the time--Samms saw a tangle of 
fighting, screaming _colors_ whose like no entity possessing the sense of sight 
had ever before imagined. Reds, yellows, blues, greens, purples, and every 
variation and inter-mixture possible; laid on or splashed on or occurring 
naturally at perfect random, smote his eyes as violently as the all-pervading 
noise had been assailing his ears. Their skins were a strikingly, livid, pale 
blue, absolutely devoid of hair; and their lidless eyes, without a sign of 
iris, were chillingly horrible in their stark contrast of enormous, glaring 
black pupil and ghastly, transparent blue eyeball. 

As the two Terrestrials entered the room, the beings struggled to their feet 
and hurried laboriously away. "If you can't talk sense keep still. I don't know 
what kind of an audio system they've got, but there's no use taking unnecessary 
chances. . these things are. . " 

"Sh. . . . ?" 

"The Lord of the Marches issues his own orders. As a matter of cold fact, I am 
no longer human. Thus, they left it deliberately for some human race to find. 

The Bailey boom, with its spider-web-like network of grounding cables and with 
a large pulley at its end, extended two hundred feet straight out from the side 
of the ship. We won't get back until Jim and I work out something to steer us 
with. " 

"All right. . " began Margaret. 

"Yes, it feels that way because we have nothing to judge by. . . . " began 
Margaret. "What would have?" 

"With this new stuff the Urvanians would have wiped the Osnomians out. " 

"We'll have to, I guess. Shoot!" 

The pilot's right hand, forefinger outstretched, moved unenthusiastically 
toward a red button on his panel. "You might, though, at that. Airplane 
accidents are numerous, and I am an aviator. Also, has it ever occurred to you 
that the heavy forging for the Skylark, ordered a while ago, are of steel?" 

Seaton paused, dumbfounded, in the act of lighting his pipe. Soon it broke 
through, and the slight rush of air was stopped by the insertion of a tightly 
fitting rubber tube. I brought along a piece of platinum from the power plant, 
and something that I think is tantalum from Barkovis' description of it. " 

"And I said I wouldn't. The only way to develop teeth is to bite with 'em. I've 
been straightening out that brain record--cutting out the hazy stretches and 
getting his knowledge straightened out so we can use it, and there's a lot of 
this kind of stuff in the record you can get. We can outrun you, outjump you, 
throw you down, or lick you; we can run faster, hit harder, dive deeper, and 
come up dryer, than you can. Dorothy's parents and Martin's bankers will think 
they are dead by this time. " 

"That's the way with most problems," the Chief admitted. "We read ComOff 
Flurnoy. We know of the seventy planets, but nothing of what you found. He 
examined the compartment and the hatch minutely. 

"Wells, sir. You don't quite understand. I will call in a few of our most 
expert robe-makers, who will weave the gowns. Before they come, let us decide 
upon the ceremony. Our usual time for ceremonies is just before koprat--is that 
time satisfactory to you?" 

Assured that it was, he turned to his son. . I'm getting more afraid of it 
every minute. No, darling, she isn't playing games. She's playing for keeps, 
and she's a mighty smooth worker. " 

"You can say _that_ again. Nothing on Earth except a war could get them 
together or hold them together. . " 

"Because Olmstead can not do it," a hitherto silent mind cut in, decisively. 
"I, Rularion of North Polar Jupiter, say so. . . . . . " The droning voice 
broke off short in the middle of a word and the private stood rigid, in the act 
of reaching for another slip, every faculty concentrated upon something 
imperceptible to his companion. 

"Take the controls, will you, Nadia? Think I'll finish up the tube. Cleveland 
and I will come down, and we'll all look around. Which was practically all the 
time. If it had not been for you, this would have been the end, as not a 
Kondalian soldier could move--any person touching iridium was helpless and 
would have been killed. " 

"Oh, you expect, then. But for my money, you are people," Hilton said, and 
Karns agreed. "But there's no use of us waiting, if you're sure you know which 
one of those stars up ahead is Nevia. Do you, Cleve?" 

"Definitely. It isn't. She's a very fine person, with a very fine personality. 
May immortal Grolossen speed the healing of your father's wound. " 











Late that night--or, rather, very early the following morning--Senator Morgan 
and his Number One secretary were closeted in the former's doubly 
spy-ray-proofed office. His face was white as chalk. 

"Read that, Mr. Calkins, in Room 6217. He will run you through the mill. " 

And that night, in an obscure boarding-house, Mr. Crane?" 

"That is rather unjustifiably high praise, Miss Spencer," replied Crane, "but 
as I have been guilty of one or two things along that line, I may be the man he 
meant. 

"One more thing, Jill; a detail. He will have no information whatever, and the 
first attempt to do anything with the stuff will blow him and all the country 
around him for miles into an impalpable powder. You will lose your chemist, 
your solution, and all hope of getting the process. 

That evening he selected a smooth, fine-grained stone and whetted the already 
almost perfect cutting edge of his new sword; an edge which in cross-section 
was rather more like an extremely sharp cold-chisel than a hollow-ground razor. 
He fitted the two-hand grip meticulously with worked and tempered rawhide, 
thrilling again and again as each touch of an educated and talented finger-tip 
told him over and over that here was some thing brand new in metal--a real 
god-metal. 

A piece of flat wrought iron, about three-sixteenths by five inches and about a 
foot long, already lay on a smooth and heavy hardwood block. 



"I greet you, Supreme Grand Marshal Entlore, Highest Commander of the Armed 
Forces of Nargoda. This is the starship _Pleiades_, of System Sol, Planet 
Tellus. . . but I can't see why _all_ their power went out at once. I know, 
though, that the Osnomians have defenses against all these things except this 
last stunt of the charged guns. That must be the new one that Mardonale stole 
from Kondal. The other thirteen are fedo and fediro, or, as you would say, 
princes and princesses of the same nation. Radiating from the seven cardinal 
points of the building were short lanes leading to star-shaped open plots, from 
which in turn branched out ways to other stellate areas; ways reaching, after 
many such steps, to the towering inner walls of the metropolis. Scornful of the 
pitiful weapons wielded by man, she hung there, her sinister beauty of line 
sharply defined against the cloudless sky. The sun was setting; a vast ball of 
purple flame dropping rapidly toward the horizon. Darkness came suddenly as 
that seething ball disappeared, and the air became bitterly cold, in sharp 
contrast to the pleasant warmth of a moment before. I don't think Hodell ever 
saw a man like you before, sir. But before we do it we must do enough 
preliminary work to be sure that you will not be harmed in any way. He's big 
and he's clean. Comb _that_ out of your whiskers, you red-headed mule!" 

"Well. . well, peculiar. You two are a lot alike, at that, even though you 
don't look anything like each other. They may think we're stupid animals, but 
before you two and the Triplanetary Patrol and the Service get done with them 
they'll have another think coming. They are the ones I'm worried about. It's a 
sweet system--we'll have to rig up one between Tellus and the moon. It will be 
your responsibility to see to it that they do not rebuild. . and he would not, 
for obvious reasons, bring in his secret armed forces. Straight down one of 
those gigantic lifeless shafts the fleet of space craft dropped--straight down 
a full two miles before the landing signal was given. 

It being mid-afternoon of Friday, the traffic was already heavy. His thick skin 
was of the characteristic Osnomian green and his eyes were the usual black, but 
he had no hair whatever. " 

"What? Are you _sure_ of that? Aren't you holding back maybe just a little bit 
of a suspicion, for diplomatic reasons?" 

"I am holding nothing back; and through my Lens I can make you certain of the 
fact. Apparently you didn't time the interval between the shots and the arrival 
of the tanks. 

No sooner had the precious fluid been stored away than the detectors again 
broke into an uproar. In one direction was an enormous mass of iron, scarcely 
detectable; in another a great number of smaller masses; in a third an isolated 
mass, comparatively small in size. Some of them were single figures of men and 
women; some were busts; some were groups in natural or allegorical poses--all 
were done with consummate skill and feeling. " 

"But your statues are wonderful!" 

"As I told you, those statues were made myriads of years ago. All menial work 
and most of the manual labor is done by the slave race. Similarly, I believe 
that I can speak for the Triplanetary Council--the governing body of three of 
the planets of our solar system--in saying that there is no need for any more 
conflict between our peoples. I also was compelled by circumstances to do 
certain things which I now wish could be undone; but as you have said, the past 
is past. 

Most of the crews and all of the teams except the First were working on side 
issues--tasks which, while important in and of themselves, had very little to 
do with the project's main problem. It should be fairly easy, as it involves 
only a simple integration in ninety-seven dimensions. His arms were as large as 
a strong man's thigh and hung almost to the floor. The bar had been broken and 
these holes had been made by some heavy body, probably a meteorite, falling 
with terrific velocity. The bellowing, shrieking siren had cleared the air 
magically of the swarm of aircraft in her path, and quietly, calmly, 
majestically, the _Arcturus_ floated upward. 

She had intended to go up thirty feet. The monster disappeared utterly, and 
Seaton, with unerring hand, reversed the bar and darted back down toward the 
fleet of airships. He reached them in time to focus the attractor upon the 
wrecked and helpless plane in the middle of its five-thousand-foot fall and 
lowered it gently to the ground, surrounded by the fleet. Behind them came a 
somewhat smaller ring of light cruisers, then rings of heavy cruisers and of 
light battleships, and finally of heavy battleships. No wings--they act like 
helicopters. 

Nalboon rode in a large and gaily-decorated plane, which led the fleet at its 
full speed of six hundred miles an hour, the Skylark taking a placing a few 
hundred yards above the flagship. 

"I don't get these folks at all, Mart," said Seaton, after a moment's silence. 

"I understand your problem, I believe, since Orlon has transferred to me all 
the thoughts he had from you. When you do realize it, you will know that mutual 
destruction is inevitable if you continue this internecine war. But our 
science, so long attuned to the arts of peace, had fallen behind lamentably in 
the devising of more and ever more deadly instruments of destruction. 

"Probably you are right in that," Brookings paled slightly. 

"Is that all that was bothering you? What does a little money amount to between 
you and me?" 

"Nothing--but I'm awfully glad that I didn't know it before," she replied, as 
she returned his caress with fervor. "That is, it means nothing if you are 
perfectly sure I'm not. That is a point to which your two-value logic can be 
strictly applied. It was soon spent, however, and after the final observation, 
the others waiting in breathless suspense for him to finish his calculations, 
he made his curt announcement. Any who are not seated will seat themselves at 
once. 

"You first, Spud. Whom did you talk to, and what did he, she, or it say?" 
Although Conway Costigan was a few years older than the other three, they all 
called him by nickname as a matter of course. . . are you sure we can get away 
with it?" 

"Certainly," Belle put in. . . should think they'd _have_ to radiate from a 
center, and so be spherical," Brandon cogitated. "That's to keep on going 
straight out, the way we're headed now. . qualities virtually always mutually 
exclusive; but the combination of which makes your fusion uniquely qualified to 
lead and direct this new and magnificent movement. But Therea and I have been 
idle and frustrated far too long. " 

"How come you lasted till now, then?" asked Seaton. "Let's finish it up and 
shoot a little juice through it, just to try it out. All were dressed for the 
ceremonial leave-taking, the three Americans wearing their spotless white, the 
Kondalians wearing their most resplendent trappings. 

"This formal stuff sure does pull my cork!" exclaimed Seaton to Dunark. It was 
from the grand fleet of Kondal, hastening from the bordering ocean to the 
defense of the city. Short as had been the time consumed by their journey from 
the Sixth City, they found a curious and excited crowd awaiting them. " 

"We've been working along those lines ever since you reported," Rodebush said, 
"and we're beginning to see light. We've got acetylene emergency lamps, you 
know, and we don't need to economize on oxygen. There is, however, consumption: 
plenty of consumption. And what that incredibly intense bombardment impinges up 
is. Then hordes of young men and young women went suddenly and briefly to work; 
at least four in every precinct of the entire nation. . . . . Wait a minute, I 
just had a thought. "This hard conditioning was to last only _until_ the 
Masters returned. "This is too good to keep, and since they cannot understand 
English, I'll tell you something. It came right through the ceiling like a 
flash--went right through you and on down through the floor. 

"Oh, I'm _so_ sorry. . " the observer began, but broke off, muttering 
unintelligibly at intervals; then swung the visiray beam toward the Earth. It 
had very little water, very little atmosphere, and very little vegetation. Its 
atmosphere, while rich enough in oxygen and not really poisonous, was so rank 
with indescribably fetid vapors as to be scarcely breatheable. But these things 
bothered the engineers not at all. Order me up two more, then--one at half of 
what I've got here, the other double it," and he reeled off the figures for the 
charge and the casing of the explosive. Possibly some gas, but probably not. 
While we live there is hope. But do you realize just how busy a man you are 
going to be during those ten or twelve seconds?" 

"Fully. " Cloud's face grew somber. "You can probably whip yours, though, in 
time. . . 

He glanced at the king, then stared back at the broad, trampled, deep-rutted 
way the army had come. Soon he heard a car slow down overhead, heard a few 
rapid footfalls, and saw the dark form of a large man outlined against the gray 
face of the abutment. He saw the man lift his hand high above his head, and saw 
a black rectangle appear in the gray, engulf the man, and disappear. " 

"That is a terrible program, Doctor. I do not think that the Corporation would 
care to go into a matter of this kind. He must know what these Lewistons will 
do, and he knows that we'll get a chance to use them, some way or other, before 
he gets to us again," Costigan asserted, confidently--but again he was wrong. 
However, I missed the point that if control is possible, the controller must be 
a mind. 

"There is not quite enough of each of three components, all of which are 
usually associated with the male. The women, from heroically-framed Fao Talaho 
up--or down?--to surprisingly slender Mirea Mitala, all were arrestingly 
beautiful; breathtakingly proportioned; spectacularly female. In here, 
Thomasina!" The kitten had been climbing enthusiastically up his leg; now, as 
he held a pocket invitingly open, she sprang into it, settled down, and began 
to purr blissfully. While the barbers and Kinnison stared pop-eyed Samms went 
on: 

"She is determined to adopt me, and it would be a shame not to requite such 
affection. Would you part with her--for, say, ten credits?" 

"_Ten credits!_ I'll be glad to give her to you for nothing!" 

"Ten it is, then. "I crawl. . . . . . " 

"I said I was coming after you, and if I get away I'll be there. Scott, Smith, 
Penfield, DuQuesne, Roberts--quite a bunch of them. In that you are wrong. It 
is true that I am acquainted with those others, but they are my enemies. 
Throwing himself down a vertical shaft, he flew toward a tiny projector-locker, 
in the lowermost part of one of the great star's points, the hexans in hot 
pursuit. As he sailed through the air he spoke. 

"Wixill, I am being watched again--I can feel very plainly that strange 
intelligence watching everything I do. Now we'd better get organized old 
partner, for a long campaign. My idea is to start out like this. . . " 

"Perfect physiques? Why, they're as weak as children," interrupted Dorothy. 
"You be extra nice to her, Dick. You have not had your sixteen hours, but 
everything will be regular from now on. " Another man appeared, but the 
starship did not move. 

Garlock drove his probe. "Who is your superior officer?" and before the man 
could formulate a denial, that superior stood helpless beside him. Reacting 
automatically, Costigan swung his unconscious opponent around in front of him, 
so that it was into an enemy's body that the vicious ray tore, and not into his 
own. That leaves three of us to do all the other work of a survey. And her 
crew, instead of the usual twenty-odd men, numbered only seven--one cook, three 
engineers, and three watch officers. For some time the young Third Officer, 
then at the board, had been studying something on his plate; comparing it 
minutely with the chart clipped into the rack in front of him. He bumped one of 
them off with his hands and the others with his gat--one of those big 
automatics that throw a slug like a cannon. None of us knew he had it. It was 
hard work, and he did not want to wear himself out too soon. He might need a 
lot, and suddenly, later on, and it would be a good idea to have something in 
reserve. Apparently he did not notice that fact, but went quietly about his 
assigned duties. " 

"No matter what your duties may be, you'll have to have time to study. But 
after an hour of waiting, and while the microphones made a noise as of rustling 
papers, the needle of the compass moved. All blocks were locked at maximum. " 

"While that conclusion could once have been defensible, it is now virtually 
certain that the Masters had stores of knowledge which they may or may not have 
withheld from the Omans, but which were in some way made available to the 
neo-humans. Also, there is no basis whatever for the assumption that this new 
race has revealed all its potentialities. " 

"Statistically, that is probably true. We could so protect and shield each one 
of our protege races that not a war would be waged and not a law would be 
broken. 

"By George!" he cried, shaking Seaton's hand in both of his. Instead: 

"I would like to show you, if I may, the above-ground part of our Works?" 

"My time is yours, sir. Tighter! Smaller! Rounder! There! Hold it! Reality does 
not exist--distance does not exist--all possible points are. No Rigellian is, 
or ever will be or can be, what you think of as 'corrupt' or 'corruptible'. 
Indeed, it is only by the narrowest, most intense concentration upon every line 
of your thought that I can translate your meaning into a concept possible for 
any of us even to understand. I will call in a few of our most expert 
robe-makers, who will weave the gowns. Before they come, let us decide upon the 
ceremony. I think you are familiar with our marriage customs, but I will 
explain them to make sure. It was the thought-form of a living Master. Man had 
liberated it before he could really control it. You have what you call 
'seasons. ' This, then, must be your 'winter. ' Right?" 

"Right the first time. " 

"Good for you, Peg, you're a regular fellow!" Seaton exclaimed. 

"What was what? I didn't hear anything?" 

"Something screwy somewhere! I felt a vibration, and anything that'd make this 
mountain of steel even quiver must have given us one gosh-awful nudge. There's 
another!" 

The girl, painfully tense, felt only a barely perceptible tremor, but the 
computer, knowing far better than she the inconceivable strength and mass of 
that enormous structure of solidly braced hardened steel, sprang into action. 



There was no doubt at all that those beams were highly effective. Invisible for 
the most part, whenever one struck a Dilipic ship or plane everything in its 
path flared almost instantly into vapor and the beam glared incandescently, 
blindingly white or violet or high blue--never anything lower than blue. 

Fao Talaho was a couple of inches shorter than Belle; and a good fifteen pounds 
heavier. Finally, at over a hundred megatons equivalent, he did get results--of 
a sort. But to get back to our velocity--taking Throckmorton's estimates it 
figures somewhere near the order of magnitude of ten to the twenty-seventh. 
Fast enough, anyway, so that you'd better bend an eye on that plate. 

"Kinda think I'll do most of it from here, but you can't always tell. It may be 
one of those other people. Some of them, in fact, will live through it. On the 
other hand, what happens if we stay here? They will find us sooner or later, 
and we don't know any too much about these ultra-weapons. We are land-dwellers, 
and there is little if any land on this planet. 

Then, all racial opposition liquidated and overmastering lust as unquenched as 
ever, the surviving Eddorians fought among themselves: "push-button" wars 
employing engines of destruction against which the only possible defense was a 
fantastic thickness of planetary bedrock. 

Finally, unable either to kill or to enslave each other, the comparatively few 
survivors made a peace of sorts. Since each had an utterly insatiable lust for 
power, and since it had become clear that they could neither conquer nor kill 
each other, they would combine forces and conquer enough planets--enough 
galaxies--so that each Eddorian could have as much power and authority as he 
could possibly handle. " 

"We, the Elders of Arisia in fusion, are here. That sounded fishy to me, and I 
fired him. Although the whole proceeding occupied only a fraction of a second, 
it seemed to Seaton as though he watched the weapon for hours. The paralysis 
will wear off long before that, so he'll be all right when he wakes up; and 
we're going away from here with everything we can put out. " Deston flipped a 
toggle and the solitary green light went out. In that instant Cloud's mind 
pounced. Simultaneous equations: nine of them, involving nine unknowns. An 
integration in four dimensions. His arms were as large as a strong man's thigh 
and hung almost to the floor. 

"I pick my own company an' I drink what I damn please," Jones announced, 
grittily. "Them lunkers ain't hurt none, to speak of. . . . . " 

"I don't give a swivel-eyed tinker's damn how busy you are. " 

"Sure we can!" Kinnison protested. "With those special tools, cutting torches, 
and all the stuff, we'd be sitting pretty. Also, having the metal may save us 
months of time in mining it. . . . . if our number is going up, Conway," Clio 
began, unsteadily. 

"Not yet, it isn't!" he snapped. "What's your time?" 

"Three, fourteen, thirty-seven. So go back to bed, you night-prowling owl. " 

"Of what day, month, and year?" Deston insisted. "They're wearing anything and 
everything, from bikinis to coveralls!" 

"Yes, but notice. . we'll explore the whole solar system! Great Cat, what a 
chance! A fool for luck is right!" 

He came to himself with a start. " 

"Chief, you positively amaze me," Sandra said then. Good. " 

"Well, I haven't enjoyed it, either. It was none of his business; he was a 
rehab man. 

As good an indication as any can be given, perhaps, by mentioning the fact that 
it had taken the Patrol's best engineers over six months to perfect the armor 
which Virgil Samms then wore. For no ordinary space-suit would do. While we 
look all right to them, and they look all right to us, in both kinds of light, 
they look just as different to themselves under our daylight lamps as we do to 
ourselves in their green light. " 

"They see things differently than we do," explained Seaton. "Look at the 
Kondal!" 

Something had happened indeed. The peculiarly flowing subtly changing thing 
darted back and forth, rose and fell, appeared and disappeared; undergoing the 
while cyclic changes in shape and form and size, in aspect and texture. It was 
now spiny, now tentacular, now scaly, now covered with peculiarly repellent 
feather-like fronds, each oozing a crimson slime. If Lopresto is a financier, 
I'm an angel, with wings and halo complete. When it is done, it will be a thing 
of beauty as long as Norlamin shall endure. Hour after hour the massive wedge 
of steel bored outward, away from Jupiter; hour after hour Stevens' anxious 
eyes scanned his instruments; hour after hour hope mounted and relief took the 
place of anxiety as the screens remained blank throughout every inquiring 
thrust into the empty ether. " 

"I agree with you, and we shall proceed upon that assumption. They know, then, 
that neither they nor we can do anything as long as we maintain the zone--that 
it is a stalemate. . . . . " Her beautifully-manicured hands swept the full 
circle of her waistline, then continued to demonstrate appropriately the rest 
of her speech: 

". . there! Better?" 

"Infinitely better. '" She tried to be jaunty, but the jauntiness did not ring 
quite true. 

The power failed, and the lights. They won't turn 'em on and we can't. I 
haven't the faintest idea, whether it will take days yet or weeks. The way 
they've been going, they won't have it in twenty-five years. " 

"The whole planet!" gasped Margaret. "Right here--he covered almost half the 
visiplate!" 

She outlined for him, as nearly as she could, the exact position of the object 
she had seen, and he calculated rapidly. "This is the crater, here, with the 
vortex at the bottom, there. . " 

"Before you get too far away from the subject, what are you going to do about 
Eridan?" 

"Nothing, for the moment, would be best, I believe. Oxygen concentration a 
little high, but not much. Finally, still swinging his murderous weapon, Phagon 
of Lomarr went flat on the ground. His voice could not be heard in even the 
lessened tumult, but he continued: 

"It must be that our repellers have set up a partial vacuum by repelling even 
the air!" 



Suddenly the shelling ceased and the Skylark was enveloped by a blinding glare 
from hundreds of great reflectors; an intense, searching, bluish-violet light 
that burned the flesh and seared through eyelids and eyeballs into the very 
brain. The captive was standing utterly rigid, eyes closed, every sense and 
faculty mustered to resist that cruelly penetrant attack upon the very 
innermost recesses of his mind. A good-night kiss, Clee, darling? Just one--and 
just a little one, at that?" 

"Sweetheart!" 

There were more than one, and none of them was little. " 

"But suppose they change the width of their slices, and hit this cubby, small 
as it is?" 

"It'd be just too bad," he shrugged. "In that case, we'd never know what hit 
us, so it's no good worrying about it. Some passenger--disguised--slugged the 
Chief--took his suit and projectors--hole in duct--p-s-s-t! All washed out! 
Maybe that's all he was scheduled to do to us in this performance, but he'll do 
nothing else in his life!" 

"Don't go down there!" protested the girl. " 

And in the control room, to Sawtelle, "Needle-beam cover, please; set for 
minimum aperture and lethal blast. Armor--mark eighty fours--six by six extra 
heavies--a ninety sixty for an ambulance--full escort, upstairs and 
down--way-friskers--'copters--cruisers and big stuff--in short, the works. 
Quite an operation, don't you think?" 

"Immense, sir. Two hours ago, sir. There's a good one a few blocks further 
along. Morgan and his crew were swinging from the heels, with everything and 
anything they could dig up or invent, however little of truth or even of 
plausibility it might contain, and Rod the Rock had never held even in 
principle with the gentle precept of turning the other cheek. "Looking right 
through anybody is too ghastly for words, but I think they're perfectly all x, 
anyway, in spite of their being so hideous and so cold-blooded!" 









A Frigid Civilization 



"Hi, Percival Van Schravendyck Stevens!" Nadia strode purposely into Stevens' 
room and seized him by the shoulder. Two more whistling strokes and a moment's 
study of the scene of action assured him that there would be no more sacrifice 
that day. "One priest in copper, ten Tarkians in iron, a five each of bowmen 
and spearmen. " 

Tedric did not have to tell the boy where to go or what to do or to hurry about 
it; as both ran for the ironmaster's armor the youngster was two steps in the 
lead. 

"Of course Jill's going, if anybody does!" he burst out vehemently. "Count 
_her_ out, with all the stuff she's got? _Hardly_!" 

"Why, Jack! This, from _you_?" Jill seemed highly surprised. You see, Jarve 
didn't want to do it at all, but he had to. . . . and behind him, just out of 
eye-corner visibility, were the three kids. And a whole lifetime of this loomed 
ahead--a vista of emptiness more vacuous far than the emptiest reaches of 
intergalactic space. " 

Time passed. Their larder was full, the receptor was finished, and the beam 
transmitter was almost ready to attach to the turbo-alternator before the calm 
was broken. There the walls did not come together, but continued on to border a 
lane leading up to the massive structure of cream-and-green marble, topped by 
its enormous, glassy dome--the observatory of Orlon. 

"Welcome to Norlamin, Terrestrials," the deep, calm voice of the astronomer 
greeted them, and Orlon in the flesh shook hands cordially in the American 
fashion with each of them in turn, and placed around each neck a crystal chain 
from which depended a small Norlaminian chronometer-radiophone. Behind him 
there stood four other old men. I have, however, certain ends of my own in 
view. To accomplish my plans I require hundreds of millions in gold and other 
hundreds of millions in uranium, thorium, and radium; all of which I shall take 
from the planets of this Solar System before I leave it. Stop talking; there 
may be lip-readers or high-powered listeners around. Say the Masters didn't 
come from Terra, but from some other planet. " 

After a glance through the telescope, Crane knew that they were still too far 
from the group of suns to place any planet with certainty, and began taking 
notes. For a few hours the seventeen suns of this strange solar system shone 
upon the flying space-car, after which they assumed the aspect of a 
widely-separated cluster of enormous stars, slowly growing smaller and smaller 
and shrinking closer and closer together. They aren't wise to you, are they, 
Doctor?" 

"Not a chance!" sneered DuQuesne. "I didn't suppose a silencer could work that 
fast. The Ambassadors' Ball is next Tuesday evening, you know, and that's one 
function I can't stay away from, even with a Class A Double Prime excuse. " 

"We might iron him to a post?" suggested Crane, doubtfully. "In with a mob of 
normal-space pirate-smugglers. I'll buy that, but there wouldn't be enough 
plunder to----" 

"Just a sec. So he's a pretty good rule-of-thumb astrogator, too, and we're 
computing every element of the flight. 

When half the distance had been covered, the bar was reversed, the travelers 
holding an impromptu ceremony as the great vessel spun around its center 
through an angle of one hundred and eighty degrees. A few days later the 
observers began to recognize some of the fixed stars in familiar constellations 
and knew that the yellowish-white star directly in their line of flight was the 
sun of their own solar system. They had not been harmed. 

It might have been better, however, if Phryges had died with Kinnexa on Norgrad 
Field; in which case the continent would probably have endured. Chief Pilot 
Breckenridge and I will not be with you. Timorous Timmies. " 

"Huh? Oh. . . . . You haven't said anything, so I thought, perhaps. " 

Seaton removed the harness and glanced at the spot from which he had taken off, 
where now appeared a hemispherical hole in the ground. No amount of the hardest 
known abrasive will even roughen its surface. I haven't figured out how fast 
that is, but it must be pretty slow. . . . the matter? What's the matter? Oh. . 
. . you. And that wasn't _anything_ compared to such a radical transformation 
as this. " 

"You chirped it then, Blackie. Say the word and the war's all off. That girl 
has got everything. . . . . . or, rather, I don't see at all," Fao said, 
thoughtfully. "With your help we have reduced their strength to a fraction of 
what it was, but they have not given up. The general seized the instrument and 
cranked. 

"Get me Spearmint. " 

"Better tell us what it is, hadn't you?" The ambulance was now jolting along 
what had been the road. "They've got phones at the hospital where we're going, 
but you might faint or something before we get there. "Now it will roll--under 
its own power--no one man now is or ever will be indispensable to the Galactic 
Patrol--_nothing_ can stop it now!" 







EPILOGUE 



The murder of Senator Morgan, in his own private office, was never solved. The 
large bottle has a specific gravity of 1. 80, as it had when I prepared it; 
that in the vial reads only 1. EDDORE 



Like two high executives of a Tellurian corporation discussing business affairs 
during a chance meeting at one of their clubs, Eddore's All Highest and 
Gharlane, his second in command, were having the Eddorian equivalent of an 
after-business-hours chat. 

"You did a nice job on Tellus," the All-Highest commended. "On the other three, 
too, of course, but Tellus was so far and away the worst of the lot that the 
excellence of the work stands out. What had appeared to be a glade was in 
reality a rock, or rather, a ledge of apparently solid metal, with scarcely a 
loose fragment to be seen. Six feet four; shoulders that would just barely go 
through a door; muscled like Atlas and Hercules combined; skin a gleaming, 
satiny bronze; hair a rippling mass of lambent flame. 

In their massed hundreds, the savages dropped where they stood, life rived away 
by the torturing ultra-violet, burned away by the blast of pure heat, or 
consumed by the conflagrations that raged instantly wherever that wide-sweeping 
fan encountered combustible material. As we haven't got the stuff to set them 
up as the Osnomians do, we'll have to do it our own way. The other captives 
fell in behind, as they had done before, and the party walked boldly toward the 
door of the palace. The guards offered no opposition, but stood at attention 
and saluted as they passed. 

And weeks. We always have. I have nothing to hide. " 

"No. Nothing like that would be any of my business. 

"What difference would it make, anyway?" James asked. 

"As the pit, Eddie. Take over. Certain matters were, however, so self-evident 
that they were not even mentioned. " 

"Yes, I inferred that from Miss Montandon's comments. " Entlore fell silent and 
Garlock watched his somber thoughts picture Margon Base and his nation's 
capital being attacked and destroyed by a fleet of invincible and invulnerable 
starships like this _Pleiades_. 

"You are wrong, sir," Garlock put in, quietly. "Your profoundest thinkers have 
never been able to answer that question. If the foregoing were true, what would 
_you_ do, Junior?" 

"I'd pass, I guess. Will you tell the public, First Lensman Samms, what your 
guess is?" 

"I will. " 

Silence fell, broken by the secretary. Our detectives must have been asleep, as 
she made away with some photographs and drawings before they caught her. 

She stuck out a tiny tip of red tongue at him. Besides, that one particular 
area of obtuseness was a real part of his charm. Wherefore she said merely: 
"I'm not sure whether I'm a bit catty or you're a bit stupid. " Bergenholm's 
voice was calm, unmoved. "I do not _think_ that you will go back to Eddore; I 
know it. " 

"Do I? However, it couldn't have been jealousy, because he isn't being 
considered for your job. Very effective. " 

"It would be. " 

"What a _terrible_ thing to say!" 

"Take it from me, if Belle Bellamy doesn't know everything that goes on it 
isn't from lack of trying. 

_There_ was something vaguely familiar! Sweating with the mental effort, he 
blocked out the too-near, too-bright stars and studied intensively those that 
were left. And unless something could be done about loose vortices before too 
many years, the consequences would be really serious. Have you got that 
Pittsburgh beam for me yet? We're about ready to go. " 

"How would you test it?" 

"Same way you would. I never did like the looks of that old guy with the 
scythe, and I would hate to let DuQuesne feel that he had slipped something 
over on me at my own game. 

"Something like that, probably," he answered, lightly. Her friend's barbed 
shafts had not wounded her. 

"Do not say that, dear. Simple. He merely opened the safe, stuck the package 
into his pocket, closed and locked the safe, and took a company ground-car to 
the spaceport. What a thing to call a _port_! He checked back; recalled exactly 
this part of his interview with Pluto's Chief Dexitroboper. I perceive that you 
are indeed a native of that hellish Planet Three, upon which it was assumed for 
so long that no life could possibly exist. " 

"Sarpedion has nothing to say about it. . . . well, so ghastly that it simply 
gives me the blue shivers just to look at one of them!" 

"They're pretty gruesome, no fooling," he agreed, "but you get used to things 
like that. Here's another point in equation 249. Suppose the unstabilized 
copper were treated with a very weak current, not strong enough to explode it? 
A sort of borderline condition? The energy would be liberated, apparently, but 
in an entirely new way. Vaneman, as Seaton's prospective father-in-law and a 
member of his company, probably knows something about the secret. Maybe all of 
it. The "Skylark" is all ready to travel. Despite the strict and apparently 
effective vigilance of the enemy destroyer, Stevens and Nadia make their 
getaway in the lifeboat, which they aptly call "Forlorn Hope," and finally make 
a safe landing on Ganymede, where Stevens almost completes a power-plant and a 
radio transmitter, to enable him to communicate with the earth or with the IPV 
_Sirius_, which is used by Westfall and Brandon (two of the world's best 
scientists) as a floating laboratory. 

Tempus fugited. 

Orders came to get ready to load M67 H. D. But as Jim said, it isn't only the 
one specialty. "No space-ship could possibly hit Tellus from here except by 
accident with a single-ended beam, and they can't use a double-ender because it 
would have to be on all the time and would be as easy to trace as the 
Mississippi River. But this planet did all its settling ages ago--which is 
undoubtedly why they picked it out--and that director in there is a 
Marchanti--the second Marchanti I have ever seen. Six feet four; shoulders that 
would just barely go through a door; muscled like Atlas and Hercules combined; 
skin a gleaming, satiny bronze; hair a rippling mass of lambent flame. Temple 
came to a full stop and caught her breath. " 

"How do you get that velocity of flow, Carfon?" asked Crane. 

"Only occasionally, and all high-flying vessels are enclosed and heated to our 
normal temperature. The moisture of their breath condensed upon the inside of 
the double glasses of their helmets, rendering sight useless. Triplanetary will 
find us, even if we take up an orbit beyond that of Pluto!" 

"We have already left your Solarian system far behind. We are going to another 
system; one far enough removed so that the spy-rays of Triplanetary will never 
find us, and yet one that we can reach in a reasonable length of time with the 
energies at our command. Some five days will be required for the journey, 
however, and our quarters are cramped. Therefore make places for yourselves 
wherever you can, and lessen the tedium of those days by working upon whatever 
problems are most pressing in your respective researches. " 

The gray monster fell silent, immersed in what thoughts no one knew, and the 
scientists set out to obey his orders. He walked into the room, sat down beside 
her and took her hand. 

Both were, however, Eddorians. 



2. ARISIA 

In the brief interval between the fall of Atlantis and the rise of Rome to the 
summit of her power, Eukonidor of Arisia had aged scarcely at all. Such screens 
necessitate the projection of pure, yet dirigible, forces--you do not have them 
upon your planet?" 

"No, and so far as I know such screens are also unknown upon Mars and Venus, 
with whose inhabitants we are friendly. " 

"The inhabitants of all the planets should be friendly; the solar system should 
be linked together in intercourse for common advancement. " 

"No such assumption is necessary. Our thought is to make you a key man in a new 
and increasingly important branch of the business, known as Department Q. Hence 
his preparations for departure were few and simple. The number of his hot lock 
box is N469T414. His subbest sub-rosa girl-friend is Fi-Chi le Bay. " 

"Nice. " Kinnison turned to Samms, now beside him at the master plate. It was 
big, and powerful; the Galactic Patrol's publicly-known forces would have stood 
exactly the chance of the proverbial snowball in the nether regions. It was 
not, however, the Port Admiral thought, big enough to form an efficient 
cylinder, or to handle the Patrol's real force in any fashion--and unless they 
shifted within the next second or two it would be too late for the enemy to do 
anything at all. But that didn't make sense! Garlock tuned, first down, then 
up; and finally, at the very top of his range, he found something, but he did 
not at first know what it was. He knew that he had fought Morgan himself to a 
scoreless tie after twisting Herkimer--and he was no soft touch--into a pretzel 
in nothing flat. Cross over there and climb the hill--join us by that dead snag 
up there. " 

Kinnison told, but fought to retain what consciousness he had. "But surely they 
cannot be of any use?" 

"On this world, I am afraid not. 

"Think over a couple of things. We'll go into details later. " 

Jill, more furiously angry than frightened until now, locked her teeth to keep 
from screaming as the pressure went on. Badge of the top skimmings of the 
top-bracket cops. But I began to think, out there on the floor, that they 
aren't advertising everything they know. " 

"That's right, too. . he could be your identical twin. You two must have had a 
common ancestor--or several--not too far back, didn't you?" 

"We certainly did. But while resting and eating and loafing and sleeping and 
enjoying each other's company, both watched Operation Moon closely enough to be 
completely informed as to everything that went on. 

The Nevians had destroyed Pittsburgh, but Adlington's bomb had blown an 
important Nevian city completely out of existence. The fact that such a race as 
the Arisians had existed so long ago was bad enough. Clayton!" He Lensed a 
vigorous thought. . . . losses less than anticipated, only seven percent. " 
Barton stuck out his hand. Except for the pitted, scarred, slagged-down spots 
which showed so clearly what driving blasts would do to such inconceivably cold 
rock and metal, Palainport was in no way distinguishable from any other 
unimproved portion of the planet's utterly bleak surface. This device revealed 
flaws in every piece, and after thoroughly testing each one and mapping out the 
imperfections he turned to Seaton with a grave face. As soon as they were 
seated at the table she turned to her father, a clean-cut, gray-haired man of 
fifty, known as one of the shrewdest attorneys in the city. Our currency is 
based upon platinum, but gold, silver, and copper are valuable. Certain jewels, 
also. " 

"I don't believe it," said Seaton, their positions now reversed. Let's turn it 
around. Say the Masters didn't come from Terra, but from some other planet. He 
opened the bleeder valves, then both air-lock ports; the contaminated air was 
replaced by the ultra-hard vacuum of the inter-planetary void. 

"If I had a brain in my head, instead of the pint of bean soup I've got up 
there, we'd have worn these when they cut up the _Arcturus_, and saved us a lot 
of mental wear and tear," he remarked. "Should have got one aboard, but didn't 
think of it Joy told me if I come home without it she'll braid it in pigtails 
and tie it up with pink ribbons, and you're shaggier than I am. " 

"By blood, yes; but I was born on Newmars. Our actual and legal residence has 
always been there. Going up to a blank wall, he manipulated an almost invisible 
dial set flush with its surface, swung a heavy door aside, and lifted out the 
Standish--a fearsome weapon. Furthermore, you must discover his exact location, 
and must get close enough to him to use the zone as a weapon, all without its 
protection. 

"We're just in time," Kromodeor whistled. "Crystalline, pentavalent 
nitrogen--no wonder it's violent!" 

"We could, of course, cover your vessel with the mirror, but I am afraid that 
it would prove of little value. 

"Right through the battery room!" Bradley groaned. "We're on the emergency 
drive now. Drop whatever you're doing, put your heads together, and find out. 

"I see, sir. We are set up to handle four at once. So did you. You know that, 
don't you?" and his black eyes stared into her violet ones with such calm 
certainty of his ability that she felt her heart sink. 

"Yes," she admitted finally, "I believe you could--that is, unless I were angry 
enough to shoot you. No one had anything constructive to offer, except to go 
ahead with Bennett as you are doing. " 

"We've been having a wonderful time!" Dorothy declared. "They've got lots of 
power, and we can rig up a transmitter unit to send it over here to our 
receptor. Then I can start welding the old _Hope_ together without waiting 
until we get to Titan to start it. Knowing now what to expect, Prescott drove 
his racing motorcycle at full speed out to the Park Road Bridge and concealed 
himself beneath the structure, in a position commanding a view of the concrete 
abutment through which the scientist must have come. " 

The Omans came in and Hilton faced Laro, eyes to eyes. A murmur arose from the 
other Kondalians, which was quickly silenced by the Kofedix. 

"It is dishonorable for a soldier of Earth to kill a helpless prisoner," he 
said briefly. Then Saunders spoke, running both hands through his unruly shock 
of fiery red hair. And the photographers were prodigal of film, shooting 
everything from all possible angles. Keep 'em staggering, completely off 
balance. Instead, he ducked past the surprised and shaken Gaul. Still stooping, 
he seized the mace, which everyone except he had forgotten, and swung; swung 
with all the totalized and synchronized power of hands, wrists, arms, 
shoulders, and magnificent body. 

"Do you see it yet?" asked Dorothy with concern. Therefore as soon as it was 
determined that the great globe was being directed toward Pittsburgh the 
fish-shaped cruiser of the void went into action. We should like to hear the 
full reports of Captain King, Captain Czuv, Chief Pilot Breckenridge, and 
Doctor Stevens. "If either of your power-plants go sour on you again, or if you 
need any more built, be sure to let us know--you can come close enough to the 
inner planets now on your own beam to talk to us on the ultra-communicator. 
Thanks for your help. Silently they picked up the injured man and carried him 
gently into his own room, barely glancing at the wrecked safe on the way. 

"Wonderful!" Tedric exclaimed. "It isn't a city at all and it isn't even in the 
same place!" 

"No, ma'am," Larry said. "While this is not exactly a formal meeting, it will 
be recorded for future reference. First, I will ask Laro a question. The boat 
is well stocked according to Nevian ideas, but it's pretty foul stuff for us to 
eat. " 



Breakfast over, they started down the valley, Stevens carrying his helmet under 
his arm. 

"You have done a great deal for me--for us," she said simply. . lust. . I 
wonder. "Shortly after you left Osnome we were invaded by the inhabitants of 
the third planet of our fourteenth sun. Although it may not have occurred to 
you, a little reflection will show that the inhabitants of all the central 
planets, such as Osnome, must perforce be absolutely ignorant of astronomy, and 
of all the wonders of outer space. This is the first planet we have visited on 
our first trial of a new method--new to us, at least--of interstellar travel. 
Despite the strict and apparently effective vigilance of the enemy destroyer, 
Stevens and Nadia make their getaway in the lifeboat, which they aptly call 
"Forlorn Hope," and finally make a safe landing on Ganymede, where Stevens 
plans to build a power-plant and a radio transmitter, to enable him to 
communicate with the earth or with the IPV Sirius, which is used by Westfall 
and Brandon (two of the world's best scientists) as a floating laboratory. 
"Inadequately" in that the Chief Chemist, a highly capable--if more than a 
little cantankerous--Explosives Engineer, had already gathered into his 
Chemical Section most of Development, most of Engineering, and all of Physics, 
Weights and Measures, and Weather. 

One room of the Chemical Laboratory--in the corner most distant from 
Administration--was separated from the rest of the building by a sixteen-inch 
wall of concrete and steel extending from foundation to roof without a door, 
window, or other opening. 

"They mustn't come out, Dick!" exclaimed Dorothy in dismay. 

"Yes? Why not?" The words were innocent enough, but Kinnison's expression was 
full of meaning. Their government is a most peculiar one, the rulers all being 
chosen by the people of the whole nation. . . m. . " Lola began. 

"That's enough!" she broke in. 

"Daddy, Dick is asleep out there in the chair. She then performed a series of 
flips that would have done credit to a professional acrobat; the finale of 
which left her sitting calmly in the previously empty seat. All three ran out 
to help the unconscious aviators, but just as they reached the machine there 
were three silenced reports and the three men fell to the ground. Horses. But, 
like horses, we are lower than slaves. Those fish not only serve as food, but 
work in the mines, hatcheries, and plantations, and do all kinds of work for 
the Nevians. For Roger's analytical detector had stood him in good stead during 
those frightful minutes in the course of which the planetoid had borne the 
brunt of Nerado's super-human attack; in such good stead that from the records 
of those ingenious instruments he and his scientists had been able to 
reconstruct not only the generators of the attacking forces, but also the 
screens employed by the amphibians in the neutralization of similar beams. 

"We can't assemble _that_ kind of stuff with our minds," Belle decided then. " 

Garlock turned to leave. 

"What an act, my male-looking but impotent darling!" came Belle's clear, 
incisive thought, bubbling with unrestrained merriment. 

"Tweet, tweet--I'm a canary!" chuckled Seaton. " 

"That was how they got Dunark, undoubtedly," said Crane, as he sent a brief 
message to the girls, assuring them that all was well, as he had been doing at 
every respite. "But why were we not overcome at the same time?" 

"They must have had the current tuned to iridium, and had to experiment until 
they found the right wave for steel," Seaton explained. "Accuracy limited only 
by that of determination of relative motions. Give me an accurate enough 
equation to feed into it, like that tape is doing, and two sighting shots, and 
I'll guarantee to pour an eighteen-inch beam into any two foot cup on Earth. 

"It's a good thing you had three of them, Mart. By the feel, I should say we 
were falling toward something that would make our earth look like a pin-head. I 
remember now that I noticed that the bus was getting a little out of plumb with 
the bar all this last watch. The stream, while only knee-deep for the most 
part, was wide, fast, and rough; the bottom was made up in toto of rounded, 
mossy, extremely slippery rocks. Tedric, however, did not stay a landlubber 
long. In a couple of hours things had quieted down enough so that the 
heavily-screened warships could approach the planet and finish up their part of 
the job. " 

"But she'll never forget that, and she'll crucify you, as well as me, when we 
land. Ninety-nine percent of its area was "Inside the fence. 

"But they need those mines very badly; they are an item of very heavy 
production. " 

"I know it. Didn'cha ever hear of 'Hellandamnation' Slayton? You will, buddy, 
you will. I never have, and I'm one of the old hands. Your surgeon will have no 
difficulty in matching the hands to the men. " As Garlock studied them his face 
hardened. "That game isn't over, my friend. He saw the keen, clear, sharply 
discerning eyes; the long, strong fingers; the smoothly flowing muscles, so 
eloquent of speed and of power. Her skin is too thick. By means of hollow 
needles forced through the leather-like material of the suit Seaton drew off a 
sample of the atmosphere within, into an Orsat apparatus, while Crane made 
pressure and temperature readings. 

"Temperature, one hundred ten degrees. He measured the angle carefully and 
peered out of all the windows on one side of the car. As soon as they had 
started Dorothy turned in the embrace of her lover's arm. "What could a man be 
called who from the sheer depths of his imagination called forth the means of 
saving from destruction all the civilization of millions of entire worlds?" 

"Don't talk that way, please, folks," Seaton was plainly very uncomfortable. 
When within one thousand feet of the surface, Seaton weighed a five-pound 
weight upon a spring-balance, finding that it weighed five and a half pounds, 
thus ascertaining that the planet was either somewhat larger than the Earth or 
more dense. The ground was almost hidden by a rank growth of vegetation, but 
here and there appeared glade-like openings. 

Seaton glanced at the faces about him. Now let's go--make it snappy!" 

"Not yet. " Samms' mien, however, lightened markedly. 

"I've heard of them, of course, but I never saw one before," and the officer 
touched the shining symbol lightly with his finger, jerking backward as there 
shot through his whole body a thrilling surge of power, shouting into his very 
bones an unpronounceable syllable--the password of the Triplanetary Service. 
"Genuine or not, it gets you to the Captain. From the time required to make the 
trip, he knew to within a few parsecs Trenco's distance from Sol. He did not 
know the direction, since the distance was so great that he had not been able 
to recognize any star or constellation. He did know, however, the course upon 
which the vessel then was, and he would know courses and distances from then 
on. When he was finally released Captain French said, with a chuckle: 

"Off the air for a minute. I want to learn about these people and they've got 
me stopped cold. Otherwise you die of lung cancer. Will do?" 

"Will do, sweetheart. " Then he had another thought, and with strong, deft 
fingers he explored the muscles of her arms and back. " 

"Certainly, we must and we will," stated DuQuesne calmly. "The Lens of Arisia. 
"What are the symptoms? What do they say?" 

"Various. Main thing seems to be that they lose their sight. Gangsters and 
pirates use it, since they have nothing to lose, being on the death list 
already. The more we learn about Morgan, the less I like the idea of her 
working on Herkimer Herkimer Third. " Jill ticked him off on a pink forefinger. 
She had been asked for an opinion; she set out to give it without apology or 
hesitation. "I've got a real hunch that he's our friend, and I'm not sure of 
Nalboon. Outside the door, walking directly toward the landing dock, Dunark 
spoke in a low voice to Seaton, without turning. 

"Nalboon knows by this time that we are making our escape, and it will be war 
to the death from here to the Skylark. She turned in flight, but the stranger 
caught her in three strides. She found herself helpless in a pair of arms equal 
in strength to Seaton's own. 

Braced against the wall, Costigan sighted along Roger's body toward the most 
distant point of the lofty dome of the artificial planet and gave him a gentle 
push. Then, each grasping Clio by an arm, the two officers shoved mightily with 
their feet and the three armored forms darted away toward their only hope of 
escape--an emergency boat which could be launched through the shell of the 
great globe. One is Kondal, the other Mardonale. " 

"That must be his title," thought Seaton rapidly. He could not get even five 
seconds of trustworthy prediction, to say nothing of ten. Can't you delouse 
your signal? Whittle the stuff down to our size?" 

"W-e-l-l-," the scientist looked hurt, but did consent to forego the high math. 
"The discharge _is_ catastrophic; in energy equivalent something of the order 
of magnitude of ten thousand discharges of lightning. 

"Oh, what a dumb-bell I am!" groaned Cleveland. 

"Congratulations on that camera, Lyman!" he exclaimed. "A mutant? Born with 
second sight--or whatever it is?" 

"Not second sight, as history describes the phenomenon, no. And your 
assumptions may or may not be valid. In fact, you make a case for its validity. 
I never have, and don't now. Have you found Cantrell's Comet yet? And why so 
sure all of a sudden that they can't find us? That power beam still connects us 
to Ganymede, doesn't it? Maybe they can trace it. " 

Dronvire tuned his mind to that of the pirate and probed. "There are four cells 
they won't reach. 

"Captain Czuv! Hexan radiation, coordinates twenty two, fourteen, area six!" 
cried the observer, and the commander swung his own telescopic finder into the 
indicated region. " 

And so on, down the list. Not this time, but in a month or so, probably. " 

Doris brightened like a sunburst. "And your folks, too, of course?" she asked. 
"Or must we go out into the hall?" 

"Sleep? I didn't know you _could_ sleep. Nor did either Deston or Jones ask him 
what he was doing. " 

"I can't understand it," DuQuesne frowned as he considered the situation. "This 
is their own lifeboat, and they want us alive, you know. " Kinnison's head was 
spinning. "I'd like to check with Barton first. Then set up to enfilade if they 
try to come up over there. We're coming so fast that our outer plating's white 
hot, but it may not be fast enough, at that. . . no, not _with_ them, but each 
of us alone in a whole house with them to wait on us! But first, they all want 
to come aboard. . . is all that I can reasonably expect. . " 

"Address me as 'Your Supremacy'," the All-Highest directed, coldly. "My 
visualization does not indicate that it will ever again be either necessary or 
desirable for you to visit or to communicate with me or with any other Arisian. 
It was starkly unthinkable that Arisia would leave them to the eternal 
dominance of such a rapacious, such a tyrannical, such a hellishly insatiable 
breed of monsters. I am simply one of us three. " 

"Get 'em, Larry. 

"Point six three eight seconds, sir," the Omans said, holding up a millisecond 
timer. 

"How do you explain _that_?" Karns demanded. 

"She's a Prime--you wouldn't know anything about it. Thank you, boys, for your 
forbearance and your help. . . . " 

"To hell with uniforms," Garlock broke in. " 

"They don't. What do you do?" 

"Swim. " 

"Oh, of course--Stevens, the great Olympic high and fancy diver! I would 
_never_ have connected our own Doctor Stevens, the eminent mathematical 
physicist, with the King of the Springboard. Say, ever since I quit being 
afraid of the water I've had a yen to do that two-and-a-half twist of yours, 
but I never met anybody who knew it well enough to teach it to me, and I've 
almost broken my back forty times trying to learn it alone!" 

"I've got you, now, too--American and British Womens' golf champion. Shake!" 
and the two shook hands vigorously, in mutual congratulation. "Tell you 
what--I'll give you some pointers on diving, and you can show me how to make a 
golf ball behave. Next to Norman Brandon, I've got the most vicious hook in 
captivity--and Norm can't help himself. Solid columns of men, marching as fast 
as they could step--there weren't trucks enough to haul them all. They probably 
regard that black thatch of Peg's and Dot's auburn mop as relics of a barbarous 
and prehistoric age--about as we would regard the hirsute hide of a Neanderthal 
man. Cooper hurled his canisters of penetrating gas, Adlington his 
allotropic-iron atomic bombs, Spencer his indestructible armor-piercing 
projectiles, and Dutton his shatterable flasks of the quintessence of 
corrosion--a sticky, tacky liquid of such dire potency that only one rare 
Solarian element could contain it. Numbers of our men are killed every karkam. 
Their wives, if of marriageable age, are expected to marry again. How about it, 
Belle?" 

"A draw it is--temporarily. " Neither, however, even offered to shake hands. 

"Welcome, friend Captain Garlock. "Situation under control, thanks to you 
Tellurians. His analytical detectors had written down each detail of every 
weapon and of every screen employed; and even while prodigious streamers of 
force were raving out from his vessel, braking her terrific progress and 
swinging her around in an immense circle back toward far Nevia, his scientists 
and mechanics were doubling and redoubling the power of his already Titanic 
installations, to match and if possible to overmatch those of Triplanetary's 
super-dreadnaught. That beam, a pipe-like hollow cylinder of intolerable 
energy, flashed out, and there was a rending, tearing crash as it struck 
Roger's hitherto impenetrable wall. A vicious beam snapped him back into place, 
the weapons were snatched away, and all three captives were held to their 
former positions. Seaton adjusted the bar parallel with the needle of the 
object-compass, turned on the coil, and advanced the speed-lever until Crane, 
reading the pyro-meters, warned him to slow down, as the shell was heating. 
Free of the earth's atmosphere, he slowly advanced the lever, one notch at a 
time, until he could no longer support the increasing weight of his hand, but 
had to draw out the rolling support designed for that emergency. But nothing 
more happened; the door remained closed, the cell stayed bottle-tight, and time 
wore slowly on. Take your choice, but I believe that they know about it, and 
know more than we do--that it is a total barrier set up in the ether. 

Space became suffused with a redly impenetrable opacity, and through that 
indescribable pall there came reaching huge arms of force incredible; writhing, 
coruscating beams of power which glowed a baleful, although almost 
imperceptible, red. I deconned Bun, then----" 

"Bun?" Barbara broke in. . . . . . " 

"I have just brought immense stores of the precious chemical and of the metal 
of power to Osnome. 

"He's there, all right. No such concept as being planet-bound could exist. Yet 
you say, and it must be, that there are millions upon millions of similar 
beings. Think of it! Venerians, Tellurians, Martians, the satellite dwellers of 
the lost space-ship, and us--so similar mentally, yet physically how 
different!" 

"But where does the mythology come in?" thought Nadia. With a quick heave of 
his shoulder, he tossed her lightly backward into the smooth-beaten track the 
creature had made and tried to leap away--but the instant he had consumed in 
rescuing the girl had been enough for the thing to seize him, and he found 
himself battling for his very life. Laro weighed at least five hundred pounds! 
And the guy _still_ looked human! 

Laro nodded again and gave himself a terrific thump on the chest. Every vestal 
was making the same sign. Let's go!" 



And in Virgil Samms' deeply-buried office, Civilization's two strongest men 
were deep in conversation. 

". . IN FULL. Crane and Margaret talked easily, but at intervals. The men on 
duty--the normal force, that is--would be doubly careful for a time. If I get 
started talking to him now, I'd be here from now on, and I've got a lot of work 
to do. I will photograph the cadavers, of course, and perform the customary 
post-mortem examinations for the record; but I know already what the findings 
will be. No extremity of either heat or cold affects it in any degree, it is 
the same when in the most powerful electric arc as it is when immersed in 
liquid helium. " 

"How about acids?" 

"That is what I am asking myself. " 

"That's exactly what I want to talk to you about. They look human, but they 
really aren't. I would like to see what one of these people would look like in 
Washington. " 



Nalboon led them into the palace proper and into a great dining hall, where a 
table was already prepared for the entire party. "All I know about it is a hazy 
idea of what the word means, but I'll start studying as soon as we get squared 
away. "Maybe you'd better cancel that 'of course'. . . it looks like a relay 
station. " 

"What? Where's Pennoyer? And Riley? And. . . No, that is too long and 
indefinite and cannot be converted directly into sathura. The brain of the 
Larry is very, very tough. Seconds count. Slaves are simply intelligent and 
docile animals, little more than horses or oxen. Mardonalians and savages are 
unfit to survive and must be exterminated. 

"Their ministers are chosen from the very fittest. They are the strongest, 
cleanest-living, and most vigorous men of this clean and vigorous nation, and 
are usually high army officers as well as ministers. " 



An attendant announced the coming of the Karfedix and his son, to pay the call 
of state. Every color of the rainbow and numberless fantastic patterns were 
there, embodied in the soft, lustrous, metallic fabric. 



In this star-shaped ring two young Vorkuls were contending for the championship 
of the fleet in a contest that seemed to combine most of the features of 
wrestling, boxing, and bar-room brawling, with no holds barred. Members of the 
firm and members of the family, however, are not classed as visitors. Thus, the 
last starship to visit us here disregarded my warning and sent down a sensing 
device as usual--Engineers do not land on non-telepathic worlds, you know--and 
it was destroyed. This will require a missile of planetary mass. How much 
radioactivity will it stand?" 

"Allotropic iron, U-235, or plutonium?" Rodebush seized his slide-rule. 

"What difference does it make?" 

"From a practical standpoint. They were, however, potentially so capable of 
making things worse that they would not be tried save as last-ditch measures. 
In short, the control of loose vortices was very much an unsolved problem. It 
should be fairly easy, as it involves only a simple integration in ninety-seven 
dimensions. No matter--Cloud did not solve them laboriously, one factor at a 
time. This thing is too important to permit of mincing words or actions, it's a 
waste of time. " 

"Why, they said we had a very good chance. " 

"He is right, Dick. I almost thought you really meant it!" Dorothy chuckled. 

"I did mean it, Dot. This is an improved model--it has quite a few gadgets of 
my own in it. It is in no part due to imperialistic aims or acts on the part of 
Atlantis. Every nation is torn by internal dissensions and strife. 

All unsuspecting, the two pirates came into view, and as they appeared the two 
officers struck. Hiking parties decided that they had hiked enough and began to 
retrace their steps. Lithe young men, who had been doing this and that, stopped 
doing it and headed for the nearest trails. 

For Kinnison _pere_ had erred slightly in saying that the rest of the 
enterprise was to be an ordinary job of shadowing. No ordinary job would do. I 
want to meet Doctor Brandon and Doctor Westfall, too," and her hand met his in 
a firm and friendly clasp. She turned to the captain, and Stevens, noticing 
that the pilot, with a quizzical expression, was about to say something, 
silenced him with a fierce aside. "We will now proceed to see what makes it 
tick. " 

Ladder after ladder of steel they climbed, and bulkhead after bulkhead opened 
at Stevens's knowing touch. 

Cloud wanted to faint then, but he didn't--quite. Instead, foggily, he tried to 
look back at the crater. Every square yard of its surface was apparently 
exactly like every other. 

"This looks mighty good to me," Garlock said then. . . " the captain's voice 
died away as his eyes raced over the collection. Flashing his lamp upon 
Perkins, he relieved him of everything he had which contained copper. 

"Don't know whether we can stop that soon or not," remarked Seaton as he set 
the levers, "but we may as well have something to shoot at. . " 

And upon that cheerless note the conference ended. 



3. ROME 

"But what have you, Livius, or any of us, for that matter, got to live for?" 
demanded Patroclus the gladiator of his cell-mate. "We are well fed, well kept, 
well exercised; like horses. But, like horses, we are lower than slaves. 
Seaton, with no sign of his surprise, thanked the giver and motioned his slaves 
to rise. 

"Wright!" he bellowed, the echoes resounding deafeningly all up and down the 
narrow tube. Cleveland and I will come down, and we'll all look around. Back up 
to me, hands behind you," she directed, crisply. "Not exact, of course, but 
that will put us close enough so that we can find 'em with our detectors. For 
five full detets in every direction--throughout a spherical volume over ten 
detets in diameter--space was void of ships. . . . . . . . " 



"My solid hope is that we never have to find out. "The attack, if any, will be 
strictly modern. I hope we'll be able to handle it. That's all, except that I 
am quitting Prescott right now. I offer you the position. 

Crane glanced at Seaton questioningly, and Satrazon, the First of Chemistry, 
answered his thought before he could voice it. 

Belle got in the first shot. 

"Thanks, fellows," Samms said, when it became evident that the brief report was 
done. Instead, it simply spread out, _in a thin layer_, over an acre or so of 
the fortress' steep and apparently still armored surface! 

"You saw that, Alex? Good. In this case, better. '" She tried to be jaunty, but 
the jauntiness did not ring quite true. Those Primes. The women. They are so 
beautiful, so different from our Osnomian women, that he intends to keep 
them--alive. Understand?" 

"Yes," returned Seaton grimly, his eyes turning hard, "I get you all right--but 
what he'll do and what he thinks he'll do are two entirely different breeds of 
cats. " 

Returning to the others, they found Dorothy and Sitar deep in conversation. 

Having done all in their power for the unfortunate man, they stood at his 
bedside, their anger all the more terrible for the fact that it was silent. 
Seaton stood with every muscle tense. He was seething with rage, his face 
purple and his eyes almost emitting sparks, his teeth clenched until the 
muscles of his jaws stood out in bands and lumps. His right hand, 
white-knuckled, gripped the butt of his pistol, while under his left the brass 
rail of the bed slowly bent under the intensity of his unconscious muscular 
effort. "But go ahead with your doping. I'm worn out. " 

Jack and Mase stared at Costigan, at Jill, and at each other. " 

Sawtelle broke the silence that followed. Then, "Okay, boys and girls, I love 
you, too, but let's cut out the slurp and sloosh, get some supper and log us 
some sack time. If he could have got what he wanted, ten full seconds, or even 
nine, he could have made it, but. . . . _" 

"_Your visualization is sound, youth. Think on. There were mighty joints of 
various kinds of meat; birds and fish, both raw and cooked in many ways; green, 
pink, purple, and white vegetables and fruits. The majordomo held each dish up 
to Seaton for inspection, the latter waving away the fish and the darkest green 
foods, but approving the others. 

"Oh, Miss Bellamy, too? I'm _very_ glad you are here," Benton said, as he shook 
hands cordially with both. I know exactly what you want, and I can show you 
exactly how to make it. Distance does not exist--every point in the reachable 
universe coincides with every other point and that common point is the focus of 
your attention. As the last speaker sat down, Newton again turned to Brandon, 
who silently jerked his head at Westfall, knowing his own inadequacy in such a 
situation--realizing that here was needed Westfall's cold and methodical 
thinking. Listen:" 

"You ought to have a Lensman president. I can do nothing whatever to sway your 
opinion, for what your minds have perceived you know to be the truth. "You see, 
I've never. . . not. It is that which gives me the hope I have. You see, I 
don't know the composition of the I-P ray, since it is outlawed to everybody 
except the police. Not only were they manacled, but each was facing a 
ray-projector, held by a soldier whose expression showed plainly that he would 
rather press the lethal contact than not. In the first place, you'd be amazed 
at how little publication was ever done of passenger lists, and apparently crew 
lists were not published at all. They have been thought the surviving figments 
of a barbarous, prehistoric worship of the sun. A few weeks of carnage and 
destruction and not a hexan was within range of the detectors of Callisto--they 
were gone! 

"This is the first time in years that Callisto's air has been free of the 
hexans," Czuv said, thoughtfully. "Did any of you happen to notice whether they 
know anything about artificial insemination?" 

"D'you think I'd stand for _that_?" Belle blazed, before Garlock could begin to 
search his mind. Would such a race of beings have need of such things as 
cities? They would not. In the first place, you'd be amazed at how little 
publication was ever done of passenger lists, and apparently crew lists were 
not published at all. Let me caution you now; do not let any Mardonalian touch 
our hands with a wire, for if you do, your thoughts will be recorded and the 
secrets of the Skylark and your many other mysterious things, such as smoking, 
matches, and magic feats, will be secrets no longer. There's only one thing to 
do. " He stared at her, his face hard in thought. 

"I am Virgil Samms, a Tellurian," he sent out slowly, carefully, after he made 
contact with the outer fringes of the creature's mind. I _will not_ be a load 
on you nor hinder you in anything you want to do. . no-no, keep still! Too many 
planets listening in--_verbum sap_. Anyway, THE PRESS smells something, too, 
and they're screaming their lungs out, especially the sob-sisters. Now, Herc, 
on the air, you're orbiting the fourth planet of a sun. " 

"Wouldn't it be easier to destroy it with an explosive copper bomb?" 

"Easier, yes, but much more dangerous to the rest of our solar system. For more 
than five thousand years our instruments have been set to detect the vibrations 
which would herald the advent of the user of that metal. 

"We accept with thanks," replied Dorothy promptly. "We'd better go to bed. One 
more such idea, in progression with the last two you've had, would certainly 
give you a compound fracture of the skull. 'Night, Cranes. " 









DuQuesne's Voyage 



Far from our solar system a cigar-shaped space-car slackened its terrific 
acceleration to a point at which human beings could walk, and two men got up, 
exercised vigorously to restore the circulation to their numbed bodies, and 
went into the galley to prepare their meal--the first since leaving the Earth 
some eight hours or more before. It was not the first time, nor would it be the 
last, that a Director of Research would seize credit for work which he was not 
capable of doing. Besides, Virgil Samms was already there. In much less than 
the three hours Garlock had mentioned, every Ozobian transport craft had been 
destroyed. If they effect a landing we are lost. The Black fleet, so proud and 
so conquering of mien a few minutes before, had fallen completely apart. " 

"Oh, I wouldn't say that. " 

Tedric remained silent. Then, shaking himself and stretching, he glanced at his 
clock. You will really work. " 

Crane and Seaton spoke together. Crane's thoughts were on the beautiful girl 
beside him, and on the splendid young genius under his roof, so deeply immersed 
in his problem that he was insensible to everything else. Almost globular; at 
least ten feet in diameter; immersed in and in perfect equilibrium with a 
pleasantly aromatic liquid--a BRAIN! 

"Relax," the Arisian ordered, soothingly, and Samms found that he _could_ 
relax. " She flashed him a gamin grin and they went on into the control room. 

"Costigan, Northrop, Kinnison--attend!" he launched a thought. If Carbonero, 
who did not know Samms at all, had been amazed at what had been happening, 
Kinnison, who had known him so long and so well, had been literally and 
completely dumbfounded. 

"At a salary well up on the confidential scale. " Keller wrote a figure upon a 
piece of paper, showed it to his visitor, then burned it in an ash-tray. 

Kinnison whistled. "The main bout is nicely on. 

"That's better. '" She tried to be jaunty, but the jauntiness did not ring 
quite true. He said himself it's _you_ who has got what it takes to lead and 
direct, not him. " 

The young scientist was called in, and was introduced to the Commissioner. 

"Go ahead, Doctor Bergenholm," Samms suggested then. " 

Farewells were said; the party embarked, and _Skylark Two_ shot upward. 



"Great suffering snakes!" he ejaculated, then stood mute, for the plate 
revealed a terrible sight. Don't go blind, exactly, but can't see where 
anything is; or, if they do see it, it isn't there. Fast as he had acted, 
Temple had not had as far to go and she had got there first. I couldn't help 
noticing, back there, that you and Jack. Nostrils plugged. Anti-thionite, 
anti-Vee-Two, anti-everything. In fact, anti-social. I'll spread their pictures 
around and see if anybody knows either of them. " 

"Or, if we happen to be outrunning the beam, we won't see them at all. In case 
Chief Pilot Breckenridge and I should not see you again, we bid you goodbye and 
wish you a safe voyage--but we expect to go back with you. " 

"But. . " His voice broke off in the middle of the word. 

With a bitter imprecation Costigan flashed on the powerful ultra-beam projector 
of the speedster and focused the plate upon Bradley's prison; careless now of 
detection, since the Nevians were already warned. Upon that plate he watched 
the Nevians carry the helpless body of the captain into a small boat, and 
continued to watch as they bore it into one of the largest buildings of the 
city. 

In response to a summons from his chief, Perkins silently appeared in 
Brookings' office, without his usual complacent smile. 

"All right, boss; one more little infraction and I'll shut up like a clam. I'd 
like to know what the girls have been doing. " 

"Yes, I met him on the way over. I am at the _Chicago's_ main starboard lock. 
There was no light, no noise, but the massive portal swung smoothly open. A 
lanista, or master of gladiators, laden with arms and armor, entered. The two 
men, after staring intently at each other for half a minute, smiled and shook 
hands vigorously. 

Then the crossed pairs, and lastly the two girls--although neither put much 
effort into the gesture. 

Seaton went to the door and started to open it. But it won't be for some time. 
A few more remarks like that 'I beg your pardon' of his and I wouldn't have a 
thought left in my head!" 

Seaton, who had opened his mouth, shut it again ludicrously, without saying a 
word, and Margaret gave him a startled glance. 

"Now I _have_ said it!" she exclaimed. "They have something we haven't, or they 
wouldn't be here. " 



"Oh!" breathed the girl. " 

"The girl? Act your age, Senator. " Herkimer's nostrils flared viciously. "Our 
race is finished. All during supper, it was very evident that Belle had 
something on her mind. "You have said that your mind is feeble. If so, there is 
no simple expression of the weakness of mine. With no expense for boilers or 
fuel, and thus with a relatively small investment in plant and a very small 
operating cost, they were selling power at one-sixth of prevailing rates, and 
still profits were almost paying for all new construction. The heavy door 
clanged open. They got out. We can't do it exactly, of course; all we can do 
now is to set up a rough scheme. Just inside this boundary there stood a ring 
of statues of heroic size. 

On Rally Day Grand Fleet lay poised near Earth. The plates showed no familiar 
stars nor patterns of heavenly bodies. Yes, they probably stayed alive quite a 
while--or might, except for the rehab crew. Shall we do it as we did before?" 

"No, it isn't necessary. We may as well enjoy your hospitality for one more 
sleeping-period, get the platinum during the first work-period, and bid you 
goodbye just before the second meal. It would be an easy matter to have this 
same mechanism place your meals before you wherever you may go upon this 
planet, provided only that a clear path can be plotted from the laboratory to 
your person. 



When Clio reported that Roger seemed to go crazy and was floundering around 
like a wild man, she had no idea of how she was understanding the actual 
situation; for Gharlane of Eddore, then energizing the form of flesh that was 
Roger, had for the first time in his prodigiously long life met in direct 
conflict with an overwhelming superior force. 

Instantly the powerful weapons of the _Hyperion_ were brought to bear, and in 
the blast of full-driven beams the stranger's screens flamed incandescent. 
Heavy guns, under the recoil of whose fierce salvos the frame of the giant 
globe trembled and shuddered, shot out their tons of high-explosive shell. What 
is its real name?" 

"I don't know. What I have said is merely a statement of fact. Here it is. But 
she isn't showing a fraction of the stuff she's really got. However, though it 
might seem that the Urvanians had all the best of it, Urvan knew that I had 
something up my sleeve besides my bare arm--and he knew that I'd clean up what 
there was left of his race if they polished off the Osnomians. " 

"That's no Osnomian," he continued, as the stranger was drawn into the airlock. 
Its atmosphere was withdrawn, the outer door opened, and he glanced across a 
bare hundred feet of space at the rocket-plane which, keel ports fiercely 
aflame, was braking her terrific speed to match the slower pace of the gigantic 
sphere of war. Wanted to fly a Jenny, but chemists were too scarce. From there 
they scatter out in all directions. So I'll have to roll my own. Please 
understand that I speak in no derogatory sense; it is only that your race has 
many thousands of generations to go before your minds should be stored with 
knowledge indiscriminately. We ourselves have not yet reached that stage, and 
we are perhaps millions of years older than you. What are those Sedlor, anyway? 
Maybe we can help you dope out something. And just think of the complexes it 
would set up in those super-children we're going to have so many of. Blacklist 
him all over the System!" 

At the word "fired" Belle, had leaped to her feet and had stopped laughing. 
"That and perpetual motion are always with us. " 

"What d'you mean, 'us'? You aren't going, are you?" 

"Try to keep me from it! The names of all five of us I-G's were put in a hat, 
and I was lucky. " 



Stevens' fears were only too well grounded, for during the "evening" of the 
following day, while he was carefully scanning the heavens for some sign of 
enemy craft, the alarm bell over his head burst into its brazen clamor. 

"Hold it, everybody!" Hilton yelled. "I'll catch that thing yet!" 

At this evidence that Seaton still thought himself master of the situation, 
Crane began to laugh, though he still kept his hand near the controlling 
switch. At last he arranged a powerful electro-magnetic device so that one 
impulse would both open and close the switch, with an open period of one 
one-thousandth of a second. Put on these pearls, and wear them all the time, 
too. " 

"I don't know about that," he said, thoughtfully. "I'm glad that Sintris won, 
but I did not expect him to win so easily. He doesn't know one-tenth of one 
percent of his people. We know they were around here a few weeks ago, and 
they're the only ones I know of that have intra-atomic power besides us and the 
Osnomians. " 

"That's no Osnomian," he continued, as the stranger was drawn into the airlock. 
Its atmosphere was withdrawn, the outer door opened, and he glanced across a 
bare hundred feet of space at the rocket-plane which, keel ports fiercely 
aflame, was braking her terrific speed to match the slower pace of the gigantic 
sphere of war. I think it was some big industrial concern after our 
power-plant. We can't go ahead with it, anyway, as long as Seaton and Crane 
have nearly all their original solution. " 

"But suppose the man _is_ crazy?" asked Brookings. "He probably is a 
monomaniac, really insane on that one thing, from studying it so much. Finally, 
still swinging his murderous weapon, Phagon of Lomarr went flat on the ground. 
The two fighters sprang apart and studied each other briefly. 

"Somebody got quite a jolt then. "You may talk to both of us, just as freely as 
though you and I were alone. Almost everyone had chosen to double up; the most 
noteworthy exceptions being twelve laboratory girls who had decided to keep on 
living together. Atlantis, the parent, was and is a clearing-house, a 
co-ordinator of effort, but has never claimed or sought authority to rule; all 
decisions being based upon free debate and free and secret ballot. 

"But now! Parties and factions everywhere, even in old Atlantis. Too late, he 
knew that not one missile, but seven, had been launched from Norheim, and at 
least five from Uighar. . . . . . . . is all that I can reasonably expect. . 
Found out anything yet, Jim?" 

"A little. " 

"But suppose they change the width of their slices, and hit this cubby, small 
as it is?" 

"It'd be just too bad," he shrugged. "In that case, we'd never know what hit 
us, so it's no good worrying about it. " 

"Check. The one basic assumption was that there are no human beings other than 
Tellurians. Samms, intensely serious, spoke aloud to his friend: 

"The Galactic Council is now assembled. Do you, Roderick K. , but the whole Top 
is spun out and the rest of her won't hold air--air, hell! She won't hold 
shipping crates! All the Wesleys are shot, and all the Q-converters. Half the 
Grahams are leaking like sieves, and----" 

"Skip that, too. " 

"Don't worry about us, Chief," Rodebush replied with a smile. "I'm just driving 
around--haven't my armor along, even. " 

"Flapdoodle!" she snorted, inelegantly. "I don't see the connection, if any. 
You see, Steel is still watching us. Since you saved our lives, we owe you a 
lot yet. . . Just a minute! There's my call--I'm wanted in Fifteen. I suppose 
that you have a lot of things to thrash out, so you may as well start now. You, 
personally, are a perfect example of what is wrong with this planet. 

"Now you may try your radio," Adams said. "And call him Clee. You certainly 
have--what else do _you_ suppose put me so far down into the dumps?" 

"In that case, you _certainly_ will. . " 

"_Relief_ valve!" Jones almost screamed, "Can I dog the damn thing down?" 

"No, it's internal. " 

"Christ, what a design--I could eat a handful of iron filings and _puke_ a 
better emergency pump than that!" 

"When it opens," Stanley went stolidly on, "the water will go through the 
by-pass back into the sump. So you'd better rod out one of the glory holes and. 
. . . it _reeks_. . . . . . . . . ?" 

"Aye. 'Twas no raid, but the first skirmish of a war. But our science, so long 
attuned to the arts of peace, had fallen behind lamentably in the devising of 
more and ever more deadly instruments of destruction. "None of you will last a 
second in this red field. This residuum either is or is not dischargeable to an 
object of planetary mass; and I'm virtually certain that it is. But say, we've 
got a lot of power on our ultra-wave; enough to reach Tellus, I think. They're 
built to stand many hours of zero pressure and almost absolute zero cold. 
Question: if we destroy all their transport, say in three hours, can you handle 
all the fighters who will be in the air or in nearby space at that time?" 

"Very easily. Zerexi shouldn't have gone into a knot so early against such a 
fast man. Well, that's that--nothing to do about it until after we get there. 
Every night when Crane went to bed he saw Seaton in his room in a haze of 
smoke, poring over blueprints or, surrounded by abstruse works upon the 
calculus and sub-atomic phenomena, making interminable calculations. Dol Kenor 
will correlate power and electricity to and with the fields. " 

"Probably," Garlock flashed back. "It faded out and I couldn't recover it. " 

"What good will that do us?" asked Margaret, striving for self-control. "A 
chemist, a planetographer, a theoretician, _two_ sociologists, a psychologist 
and a radiationist. And six of the seven are three pairs of sweeties. What kind 
of a line-up is _that_ to solve a problem in _physics_?" 

"It isn't in any physics we know. . " 

"You'll tell me nothing, Jill--I'm telling _you_! Start giving away points in 
anything and you'll find out some day that you've given away too many. I'm not 
having any of that kind of game--and as long as you're playing with me you 
aren't either--or else. 

As he had said, he could do a certain amount of reworking; but the amount of 
improvement possible to make depended entirely upon what there was to work on. 
Thus, Temple could cover about six hundred light-years. If he wants to go that 
far away from home, where is his logical destination? It can't be anywhere but 
Osnome, since that is the only place we stopped at for any length of time--the 
only place where he could have learned anything. " 

So the argument raged. Several twelve-foot cockroaches climbed nimbly across 
the fallen timber of the morass and began feeding voraciously upon the body of 
the dead dinosaur, only to be driven away by another animal, which all three 
men recognized instantly as that king of all prehistoric creatures, the 
saber-toothed tiger. This newcomer, a tawny beast towering fifteen feet high at 
the shoulder, had a mouth disproportionate even to his great size--a mouth 
armed with four great tiger-teeth more than three feet in length. And honestly, 
Jarve, I don't see how it can be improved in any respect. You've done a 
marvelous job. 

They were asexual: sexless to a degree unapproached by any form of Tellurian 
life higher than the yeasts. They were not merely hermaphroditic, nor 
androgynous, nor parthenogenetic. They were completely without sex. They were 
friendly; most enthusiastically so. The pressure normal, he divested himself of 
the suit and made a thorough examination of the vessel. He then signaled Loring 
to follow him, and soon both ships were over Kondal, so high as to be invisible 
from the ground. Her emotionless, ultra-refrigerated voice went, as ever, 
directly into the screen. "That was my hunch. You fellows work out any ideas 
you want to. But there can't be two bosses on any one job, to say nothing of 
three or seventeen. In the lead strode the tall, heavy, gray-haired man with 
whom Samms had been dealing; still defiant, still sullen, still concealing 
sternly his sheer desperation. His block was still on, full strength. His 
thick, slightly wavy hair was black. Her Chief Pilot, however, was fast--_very_ 
fast--and he had a fraction of a second in which to work. " 

"Phooie. You and me, for instance?" She stopped, put both hands on her hips, 
and glared. "So _that's_ what you thought! What do I care how long I live, or 
how, or where, as long as it's with you? But what makes you think we can 
possibly live through such a horrible conversion as that?" 

"Larry wouldn't do it if there was any question whatever. 

While Rovol was working upon one of the last instruments to be installed upon 
the controlling panel a mellow note sounded throughout the building, and he 
immediately ceased his labors and opened the master-switches of his power 
plants. 

"You have done well, youngster," he congratulated his helper, as he began to 
take off his protective covering, "Without your aid I could not have 
accomplished nearly this much during one period of labor. The periods of 
exercise and of relaxation are at hand--let us return to the house of Orlon, 
where we all shall gather to relax and to refresh ourselves for the labors of 
tomorrow. I am more interested in that which we are now building than you can 
possibly be, since many generations of the Rovol have anticipated its 
construction; yet I realize that in the interest of our welfare and for the 
progress of civilization, today's labors must not be prolonged beyond today's 
period of work. James can tell you. He said this was a little less than half of 
it, but that you could have the rest of it any time you want it. " 

"Do you suppose they will fight, anyway?" asked Crane. 

"I think we'll be able to pull their corks now, all right, after we get some 
dope. That saves our wasting some effort. One hour and an observer upon the 
Skylark would have seen that the apparent size of the massive unknown world was 
rapidly decreasing; twenty hours and it was so far away as to be invisible, 
though its effect was still great; forty hours and the effect was slight; sixty 
hours and the Skylark was out of range of the slightest measurable force of the 
monster it had left. And unless something could be done about loose vortices 
before too many years, the consequences would be really serious. Frank's a lot 
more fun. " 

The staff had gathered in the lounge, as had become the custom, to spend an 
hour or so before bedtime in reading, conversation, dancing, light flirtation 
and even lighter drinking. Most of the girls, and many of the men, drank only 
soft drinks. Hilton took one drink per day of avignognac, a fine old brandy. So 
did de Vaux--the two usually making a ceremony of it. " 

"Oh--Lola's right, Jim," Garlock said. 

"We can't keep it secret, anyway," Teddy argued. 

"Yes, but you haven't got the idea yet. We discussed once before, you remember, 
what a job it was to get into any kind of communication with the Palainians on 
Pluto. You said then that nobody could understand them, and you were 
right--then. However, I re-ran those brain-wave tapes, wearing my Lens, and 
could understand them--the thoughts, that is--as well as though they had been 
recorded in precisionist-grade English. Seaton pressed the lever, receiving as 
he did so a sensation of an unbroken calm, a serenity profound and untroubled, 
and the projection spoke. "It was never in such a field before. They'll see to 
that. We've got away clean with lots worse stuff. If he stepped out ready for 
business she'd fry him, and quick. You may not know it, but the fastest ships 
in space are chasing us, right now. " Foster's voice rose almost to a scream. 
"They must know--they're all getting out of the water and are rushing inside 
the buildings as fast as they possibly can!" 

"I see they are," grimly. "I'm right over you now, 'way up. I couldn't have you 
with me in space, and I'd like that a lot less. " 

"That makes sense. " 

"Why not?" Samms asked, sharply. "That was Spaceways, under cover?" 

"Definitely. Now see what you can do about getting me run through your mill. " 

By exerting his authority, Hilton got Sawtelle put through the "Preservatory" 
in the second batch processed. Then, linking minds with the captain, he flashed 
their joint attention to the Hall of Records. Would you like to see them?" 

"Send them to my office. The Omans were all standing motionless. "Doesn't it 
make you feel funny?" 

"It is a queer sensation. For the first time in months they had nothing to do! 
Used as they were to being surrounded by pressing tasks, they enjoyed their 
holiday immensely for a few hours. "Good Lord, Clio, why didn't you call me?" 

"Oh, I'm all right, except for being a little jittery. No need of asking how 
_you_ feel, is there?" 

"No--I feel hungry," he answered cheerfully. "If we're not a match for you and 
your gang, on foot or in the air, in body or in mind, we'll deserve whatever we 
get. How'd it be for you to navigate us over to the third planet of the 
fourteenth sun?" 

"While you build a Fenachrone super-generator?" 

"Right, the first time. Even if we killed everybody outside, the ship would 
take off before we could get close enough to open the port with the outside 
controls. "How does she work on a dead stick, Chief?" 

"Maneuverability about minus ten at this speed and in this air. 

"Taken!" came an answering yell. 

"Beat it!" 

Once more at a safe distance, DuQuesne explained. 

"I should think our bar would have exploded, with all that current. As the 
passenger saw daylight and felt the stream begin to drop, he righted himself, 
apparently selecting an objective point, and rode the current down into the 
ocean. Even with our full force of these vessels, we cannot defeat them. From 
it there reached down twin fans of death and destruction: one flaming and 
almost invisibly incandescent violet which tore at the eyes and excruciatingly 
disintegrated brain and nervous tissues; the other dully glowing an equally 
invisible red, at the touch of which body temperature soared to lethal heights 
and foliage burst cracklingly into spontaneous flame. 

In their massed hundreds, the savages dropped where they stood, life rived away 
by the torturing ultra-violet, burned away by the blast of pure heat, or 
consumed by the conflagrations that raged instantly wherever that wide-sweeping 
fan encountered combustible material. Slightly to one side were 
Rhoann--looking, if the truth must be told, as though she did not particularly 
enjoy her present position on the side-lines--her mother the queen, the rest of 
the royal family, and ranks of courtiers. 

Reaching the Temple of Scheene, he found to his immense relief that he would 
not have to storm that heavily-manned rampart alone. " 

That statement required a special type of conference, which consumed some 
little time. " She laughed suddenly, her face softening markedly. 

"Why the silence, I wonder?" asked Seaton, while the futile shells of the enemy 
continued to waste their force some hundreds of feet distant from their goal, 
and while Crane and DuQuesne were methodically destroying the huge vessels as 
fast as they could aim and fire. As they sat down, Innocent entered the room, 
carrying a tall, dewy mint julep on a tray. Piddy was right there, waiting, and 
started to raise hell. " 

"You called Deke?" A man came running up. " 



Around and around the mass of wreckage they crept, and in each of the larger 
sections Stevens connected up the enormous fixed or dirigible projectors to 
whatever accumulator cells were available through sensitive relays, all of 
which he could close by means of one radio impulse. Anyway, it didn't. They 
stock lunch-boxes in the cafeteria, you know. And, Prime Operator though he 
was, it was all he could do to make no sign; for that fleetingly-revealed 
memory was a perfect job. Very little of their stuff got through--not enough, 
they say, to do much damage to a country as big as the U. S. copyright on this 
publication was renewed. 







































MASTERS OF SPACE 



By EDWARD E. SMITH, Ph. D. C. DuQuesne, of the Rare Metals Laboratory, as soon 
as possible. 

Kromodeor was one of the last to go down. And if I die now, of what worth is 
Sarpedion's fraction of a metal that will never be made? Think well, priest!" 

Sarpedion's agent studied the truculent, glaring ironmaster for a long two 
minutes. As he finished, he drew himself along by a handrail to one of the 
windows, then to another. " 

"Oh? More than one way? That makes it still worse. " 

"I'll say. . . " 

"Shut up, Jane! They won't hurt us any more than they have already; it's 
psychologically impossible. We need something which will identify any 
representative of Civilization, positively and unmistakably, wherever he may 
be. I'm beginning to wonder. . . . Got 'em both. Thus, the energy required to 
lift you three came from the field, but the amount was so small that it did not 
lower the potential of the field by any measurable amount. Please remain 
seated, or move about with caution. In about an hour weight will gradually 
return to normal. We start in one minute. " 

"I suppose that it would be poor technique to ask how you know?" 

"It would--very poor. Our figures are right. . I didn't. . . . . . . . . ask 
for your resignation," the President announced at last. 

"Save your breath," Kinnison advised. "I came down here to do a job, and the 
only way you can keep me from doing that job is to fire me. For all of which 
good reasons I am not going to pair with you, now or ever. 

"This thing smells, Herkimer. " Jill tried desperately to pull her shattered 
nerves together. "I admit that I was shocked, Admiral Montandon. But 
landing--really, I have nothing to do with landings. They are handled by. . . . 
. . " Deston paused, thought a moment, then went on: "Maybe I wouldn't, either. 
Maybe it had a mellowing effect. " Both girls flushed slightly, the 
purplish-black color suffusing their faces. Clio broke the silence. 

"Every second counts. Man-power and tonnage and fire-power are important, of 
course, but morale has won every war in history. " 

"If they decide to wait for the election, yes. I can't name it, either--maybe 
you had better call Genealogy some day and find out. They're not taking any 
chances at all--they're going to paral. . " He reached out; two hard hands met 
in a crushing grip. "How could you possibly lay off? Just the strain, if 
nothing else. . . . . . please fill out completely. Consider only the fields. 
Feel around with me--keep tuned!--see if there's anything at all here that we 
can grab hold of and manipulate, like an Op field except probably very much 
finer. I'll be completely damned if I can see how this type of Gunther 
generator can put out a manipulable field, but it must. That's the 
only--O-W-R-C-H-H!" 

This last was a yell of pure mental agony. . . " 

"But fishy!" Cleveland broke in. . . . stopped. Wonder if somebody's there 
ahead of us? Maybe Dunark is doing this, though. Doradus S, for instance, would 
make Rigel, here, look like a tallow candle. I'm going out there, some of these 
days, just to take a look at it. " 

"But you _couldn't_ have meant it, Dick! You wouldn't have destroyed the 
Osnomians, surely--you know you wouldn't. I'm Terran Navy. Subject to civilian 
control, of course, but the civilians will be the United Galaxian Societies of 
the Galaxy, and nobody else. Whether or not it will breed true is an 
interesting topic of speculation, but one having nothing to do with the problem 
now in hand. 

Then, re-forming, a backward smash; then another drive forward. 

Hilton did not bother to maneuver his "big, husky carcass" around the desk, but 
simply hurdled it, straight toward her. There would have, also, been certain 
strings attached. Her plan was, after switching the pairings. . . . . I've just 
got a kind of a hunch that maybe they don't belong in this Galaxy at all--that 
they might be from some other Galaxy, planet and all; just riding around on it, 
as we are riding in the _Skylark_. Seaton stood motionless, his right hand 
raised in the universal sign of peace, his left holding at his hip an automatic 
pistol charged with X-plosive shells--while Crane, at the controls, had the 
Fenachrone super-generator in line, and his hand lay upon the switch, whose 
closing would volatilize the submarine and cut an incandescent path of 
destruction through the city lengthwise. 



After a moment of inaction, a hatch opened, a man stepped out upon the deck of 
the submarine, and the two tried to converse, but with no success. Seaton then 
brought out the mechanical educator, held it up for the other's inspection, and 
waved an invitation to come aboard. . . ?" Livius paused. 

"Could be," Deston said, doubtfully. 

"I think there's a better way," replied Seaton. "He may be able to work his 
way. 

"So long--see you in a few days," he added, and the _Pleiades_ vanished; to 
appear instantaneously high above the stratosphere over what was to become the 
Galaxian Field of Earth. The plates showed no familiar stars nor patterns of 
heavenly bodies. They were authorized by Crane to offer a reward of one million 
dollars for information leading to the arrest and conviction of the murderer. 
After everyone except the nurses had gone, Crane showed them the rooms they 
were to occupy while caring for the wounded man. 

As good an indication as any can be given, perhaps, by mentioning the fact that 
it had taken the Patrol's best engineers over six months to perfect the armor 
which Virgil Samms then wore. For no ordinary space-suit would do. See to it, 
please, that these remaining creatures do not attack me while I am doing it. 
All our tracers are negative yet, so nothing definite has. Less than fifty of 
your years ago, when I was but a small boy, such a projection visited my 
father. Here. 

Shortly after two o'clock of the following afternoon, Celeste took a call; and 
listened shamelessly. 

"Kinnison speaking. Each of you has taken oath to the Galactic Patrol?" 

They had. I say englobe the planet, declare martial law, and not let anything 
in or out until we find it. It is the greatest discovery the world has ever 
known, and if both Seaton and I, the only two men in the world who know how to 
handle it, drop out, it will be lost for perhaps hundreds of years. " 

"Therefore we will not question the Omans. The Masters. " 

"But that is not exactly it, Master. We convert it. He invited comments. 

There was of course a riot of protest; but--in view of what James had said 
anent suspensions and expulsions from the Galaxian Society--not one of them 
actually did quit. Four of them, however, did appeal to Delcamp, considerably 
to his surprise, to oust the interloper and to put things back where they had 
been; but they did not get much satisfaction. "I knew in advance just how you 
would feel about your color. From dull red it became cherry, and as the cherry 
red gave place to bright red heat, Seaton threw even more power into the bar as 
he muttered through his set teeth: 

"Well, Seaton, old top, you've got to cut out this loafing on the job and get 
busy!" 

In spite of his utmost exertions and in spite of the powerful ammonia plant, 
now exerting its full capacity, but sadly handicapped by the fact that its 
cooling-water was now boiling, Seaton saw the arenak shell continue to heat. 
How does he get that way?" 

"He's naturally fast, and has practiced sleight-of-hand work ever since he was 
a kid. He's one of the best amateur magicians in the country, and I will say 
that his ability along that line has come in handy for him more than once. I'm 
going to break you of that, too, Steve, if it's the last thing I ever do. " 
Both Falnians straightened up and stepped forward; neither arrogantly nor 
apologetically, but simply as though nothing at all out of the ordinary had 
taken place. As Titan grew colder and colder they probably dug their cities 
deeper and ever deeper; until humanity came finally to realize that it must 
itself change completely or perish utterly. 

"Then we may picture them as aiding evolution in changing their body chemistry. 

The walls of Virgil Samms' quarters became covered with charts, diagrams, and 
figures. Tabulations and condensations piled up on his desk and overflowed into 
baskets upon the floor. On his right the wall was solid for twenty feet. Eighty 
five. Give us all the X10 and W27 you can, without using power--we want to edge 
over close enough so that she can't help but see us when we start the rockets. 
" 

"Be sure and stay well out of range. 

But not for nothing had Conway Costigan selected for his dash for liberty the 
craft which, save only for the two immense interstellar cruisers, was the most 
powerful vessel ever built upon red Nevia. " Roderick Kinnison got up, 
deposited the inch-long butt of his cigar in an ashtray, lit another, and 
prowled about the room; hands jammed deep into breeches pockets. Wish we could 
have made some sense out of their language--like to know a few of their 
ideas--find out whether we can't get on terms with them some way or other. In 
fact, nothing about this whole foul planet--this ultra-microscopic, if 
offensive, speck of cosmic dust in the Eddorian Scheme of Things--really 
mattered at all. " 







V 



Two days passed, with no change apparent in Laro. Three days. By the end of 
that time we should be able to recognize our solar system from the appearance 
of the fixed stars. 

"I don't make it at all, Mart. I want the best physicist in this entire solar 
system--and since there are only one hundred and twenty-five planets around 
these seventeen suns, it should be simple to yon phenomenal brain. If he had 
entertained any suspicion of the beautiful girl in his arms, if anyone had 
suggested that she was trying her best to pump him, he would have smiled the 
sort of smile which only the top-drawer diplomat can achieve. He was not 
suspicious of Virgilia Samms. 

"It worked, Virgil! I talked to her for five solid minutes, practically leaning 
on her desk, and she didn't tumble! And if this wig of Bergenholm's fooled 
_her_ so completely, the job he did on you would fool _anybody_!" 

"Fine! I've done a little testing myself, on the keenest men I know, without a 
trace of recognition so far. We need help, and I appreciate your offer. You 
will bind them to yours and shape the whole into a dimensionless sphere of pure 
controlled, dirigible energy. The most fiercely driven rays of the fishes 
flamed incandescent against it, in vain. Then there leaped out from the weird 
brilliance of the walls of the fortresses great shafts of pale green 
luminescence--tractor ray after gigantic tractor ray, which seized upon the 
hexan spheres and drew them ruthlessly into the yawning open end of that 
gigantic cone. 

Then, in each group of seven, similar great streamers of energy reached out 
from fortress to fortress, until each group was welded into one mighty unit by 
twenty-one such bands of force. From my own very slight and general knowledge I 
know that it would of necessity be a ray of the fifth order. These rays are 
very new--they have been under investigation only a few hundred years--and the 
Rovol is the only student who would be at all well informed upon them. 
Advertising-- designed by experts to sell everything from aardvarks to Martian 
zyzmol ("bottled ecstacy")--but the First Lensman was a seasoned big-city 
dweller. His mind had long since become a perfect filter, admitting to his 
consciousness only things which he wanted to perceive: only so can big-city 
life be made endurable. 

Approaching the Skyway, he cut in his touring roadlights, slowed down a trifle, 
and insinuated his low-flyer into the stream of traffic. Every train and plane, 
every bus and boat and car, every conveyance of every kind and every pedestrian 
approaching New York City was searched; with a search as thorough as it was 
unobtrusive. And every thing and every entity approaching New York Spaceport 
was combed, literally by the cubic millimeter. " 

"But why such strength?" asked the lawyer doubtfully. "It depends upon whether 
his fear of you or his anger is the greater. He should pay his call of state 
here in your apartment in a short time, as it is the inviolable rule of Osnome, 
that any visitor shall receive a call of state from one of his own rank before 
leaving his apartment for the first time. It has been a mathematical 
certainty--it has been graven upon the very Sphere itself--that in time someone 
would come to us from without this system, bringing a portion, however small, 
of Rovolon--of the metal of power, of which there is not even the most minute 
trace in our entire solar system. All the signs say that we're going for a long 
ride. " 









NEVIAN STRIFE 



The Nevian space-ship was hurtling upon its way. And the funny thing is that 
there's nothing there at all, really; but Dick says that the forces meeting 
there, or something, make it act as though something really important were 
there. Shall I detour, or put on a little more negative and wait for it to come 
around to this side?" 

"Better wait, I think. I'm going up and work with the Martians on that hunch. I 
wouldn't wonder if----" 

"Hold it, Dicky! Remember I had to put you to bed after that last hunch you 
had!" 

"Here it is, anyway. And speaking of vacuum. Vessel, falsework, rollers, 
trucks, the enormous steel I-beams of the tracks, even the deep-set concrete 
piers and foundations and a vast hemisphere of the solid ground; all 
disappeared utterly and instantaneously. "Nay, sire," he admitted sheepishly. 
"I thought not of any such. " Bernadine came lithely to her feet. After a few 
minutes DuQuesne remarked: 

"This is undoubtedly a newer planet than ours. They are merely the intakes for 
a tortuous system of tubes comprising a veritable heat-exchanger, so that the 
air finally expelled is in almost perfect equilibrium with the incoming supply 
in temperature and in moisture content. 

"It's a long trip back to where they came from, and since they wanted to drift 
all the way, I think they'll be out of power before they get there," Brandon 
summed up the situation. We aren't apt to keep ahead of them long enough to do 
much leading anywhere. The few of the old, true blood stand out head and 
shoulders above the throng, and you stand out, even among them. Is that clear?" 

"That is clear. " 

"Good. This event was foretold in detail; in such complete detail that I was 
deeply, terribly shocked. This woman blowing her top was no Brownie Montandon 
any of them knew. 

But he _couldn't_--couldn't _possibly_! Nevian paralysis-guns were as outlawed 
as was Vee Two gas itself! Nevertheless, he had. Give me a five-tape course on 
it and I'll come closer than either you or James; for a hundred credits a shot. 
Something funny about it, too--none of them seem to have been touched, but the 
machinery of the suits seems to be about half missing. " 

"I've got it all on the reels, sir. " Jones let Isaacson see his jaw-muscles 
tighten in resolve. . 
