" 

The group gasped as one, but Saunders went on: "They can eat and drink and 
breathe and so on, but only because the original Masters wanted them to. Gone 
was the storming, impetuous rebel; his body was ruled solely by the precise and 
insatiable brain of the research scientist. . . . oh, excuse that crack, 
please, Dr. . . ?" 

"I do not know, nor is it necessary that I find out. 

"What an idea. Mountains of bare rock, incredible thousands of feet higher than 
the plateau forming the south bank, towered at the rushing torrent's very edge. 
Each was connected to a drive by fifty-inch high-speed conveyors. The sun as 
seen from Pluto is a dim, wan speck. The Mardonalians then concentrated the 
fire of their entire fleet upon their tiny opponent. The surviving Arpalone 
fighters and other small craft were making no attempt to land, anywhere on the 
world's surface. Tractors and pressors leaped from ship to ship, binding the 
whole myriad of hitherto discrete units into a single structure as solid, even 
comparatively as to size, as a cantilever bridge. And instead of remaining 
quiescent, waiting to be attacked, the cylinder flashed forward, inertialess, 
at maximum blast. Bombs, armor-piercing shells, gas shells of poisonous and 
corrosive fluids followed each other in close succession. The surviving 
scientists of the planetoid, expert gunners and ray-men all, destroyed many of 
the projectiles, but it was not humanly possible to cope with them all. " 

Gharlane disappeared. "Come on, Hazel. Number Four, you said, darling?" 

She led the way. Do you want to come peaceably or shall I work on your neck 
again?" 

"You could think of other places that would be more fun. " 

Seaton, though furiously eager to be off, paused at this new idea, and 
half-regretfully he replied: 

"We are so far behind them already that I guess a few hours more won't make 
much difference. "Fascinating! And, indubitably, supremely important. In fact, 
it may point out the key datum underlying the solution of our entire problem. " 

"Say it. Crane made a number of these instruments, mounted in gymbals, so that 
the delicate needles were free to turn in any direction whatever. It faded out 
as the unknown exerted himself to withstand that poignant inquisition, only to 
come back in, clearer than before, as Seaton advanced the potentiometer still 
farther. " 

"True, First Lord. "It's simply self-defense. "If you'd've let me, I'd've shown 
it to you yesterday!" 

"Undoubtedly, then. They'll wreck it and it'll cost you. I could do with some 
more sleep myself. Before I leave you, I will say that you have conferred a 
real favor upon me--you have given me something to think about for thousands of 
cycles to come. We knew of the existence of only such of the closest planets as 
were brilliant enough to be seen in our continuous sunlight, and they were few. 
A series of observations of our pursuer will, of course, be necessary to decide 
that point. _ 

_Nor did any Eddorian know that such fantastically rapid progress was being 
made. _ 



What Went Before: 

The Interplanetary Vessel Arcturus sets out for Mars, with Breckenridge as 
chief pilot, carrying on board, besides its regular crew and some passengers, 
the famous Dr. _                             | |                                
      | +--------------------------------------+ 









The Occurrence of the Impossible 



Petrified with astonishment, Richard Seaton stared after the copper steam-bath 
upon which he had been electrolyzing his solution of "X," the unknown metal. 
Stevens, designer of space ships and computer. Shutting off the lookout plate, 
he led the half-fainting girl across the room to a comfortable seat and sat 
down beside her--raging, but thoughtful. Soon she drew a spasmodic breath, 
choking and coughing, and he again changed the gaseous stream to one of pure 
air, speaking urgently as she showed signs of returning consciousness. I didn't 
want to be the first, but I won't be anywhere near the last. " 

"I'm glad you said that, Jim. 

He ordered his Dillingham, and tossed the lunch-box aboard as carelessly as 
though it did not contain an unknown number of millions of credits' worth of 
clear-quill, uncut thionite. "Not that I blame either Belle or myself. Before 
we make any kind of contact we'll have to do some organizing. As soon as his 
job's done he'll wish he'd never been born. Many primitive peoples think that 
waterfalls are inhabited by demons, and maybe these folks are afflicted the 
same way. 

But of what importance are mere weeks of time to a race that has, for many 
millions of years, been adhering rigidly to a pre-set program? 

The sheer magnitude of the operation, and the extraordinary attention to detail 
with which it was prepared and launched, explain why the Strett attack on 
Ardvor did not occur until so many weeks later than Hilton and Sawtelle 
expected it. So _damned_ good that I'm going to have to take you out of 
Department Q entirely and make you Works Manager of our new plant on Vegia. 
They merely nodded. Thus the odds were not merely two or three to one; but 
never less than eighty, and very frequently over two hundred to one. " 

"But he was smashed up pretty badly, wasn't he? I know that he had a broken arm 
and a broken leg, at least. And now, Norma, please keep everybody off my neck 
that you can. " 

"_Who_ says so, the dirty, sneaking liars?" the red-head blazed, completely 
unaware that she had reversed her former position. 

"I said _strike_!" Tedric roared. I didn't realize how much harder for her it 
would be than it is for me until I went in there and found her crying. " 

The _Boise_, of course, inerted first; followed by the _Chicago_ and nine of 
the tremendous tear-drops from Bennett. "Commissioner Kinnison is calling. 
Something terrible is going on again, out toward Orion. " 

"I've got it all on the reels, sir. "And you will?" 

"That is why I have come to you, but whether or not I will teach you depends on 
certain matters which I have not been able entirely to clarify. Those birds 
have forgotten more than we ever will know. " 

"Yes, it's a lot bigger than the _Skylark_ was. 

"At ease, sir. They stared in defiance, motionless, until the man wearing the 
belt who had studied Seaton closely, spoke a few words in a low tone, when they 
all prostrated themselves. Each Eddorian changed, not only its shape, but also 
its texture, in accordance with the requirements of the moment. 

"Except for lieutenant-commodores and up, who will tune their minds to 
me--dismissed!" Kinnison stopped talking and went onto his Lens. Jim's 
assistant. I have a thousand tapes, more or less, to study, too. . all of you. 
Better get your wet rags ready and get organized generally--every second will 
count by the time we get there. Leave your negative as it is--we'll be stopped 
directly. Whatever it is, it's dead ahead. We have one tremendous advantage in 
you. " 

"That's right, too. And then, there were a lot of little ideas that had to be 
nailed down before they got away from me. 

"Pardon me, miss, but I feel just like you look. "No use--not half enough power 
or control. 

"Of course not. Hilton worried. 

"Put Triple X Black filters on your plates and watch that asteroid. The 
offensive beams of the fish-shaped Nevian cruisers of the void were even more 
powerful. 

"Well--we went _somewhere_. " Fao 'ported up and shook hands warmly. "She's 
been kicking around under foot ever since she was knee high to a duck--we gave 
her her first lessons on a slide rule. We didn't strike any trouble going or 
coming, so she didn't need much servicing. A series of observations of our 
pursuer will, of course, be necessary to decide that point. 

". So were those machines. 

"Well, I expect Orlon'll be showing up pretty quick now," remarked Seaton; and 
it was not long until the projection appeared in the air of the control room. 
That Virgilia Samms was the most accomplished muscle-reader of her times. You'd 
both be completely impotent with any women whatever except your mates--Belle 
and me. . . . Yes, I'll be right out. " 

"See it yet, Dunark?" Seaton signaled. But first, yes, it's Alex. It ceased 
being a servant then, and became a master. It does not, however, apply to all, 
and, it lacks one whole hell of a lot of applying to me. 

Finally, in desperation, he rammed a beam down and held it down. " He turned 
and curtly dismissed the wondering O. "And _am_ I glad to see _you_, Barbara, 
even if I did just meet you yesterday! I didn't know whether I'd ever see 
another girl's face or not!" 

"Let's cut the chat," Deston said then. " 

"I'd like that. Clayton hadn't had to be told to pull in his light stuff; it 
was all pelting hell-for-leather for Sol and Tellus. Three general plans of 
battle had been mapped out by Staff. So I'm. Saw your timbers accordingly. 
We'll hold that burley by hand. . " 

"Stop stuttering and come to life, you half-witted bag! Gimme Ferber and hurry 
it up--this ship's tricky. Number One first. Number Four was being rushed to 
completion. Kinnison opened the portal. 

The Anti-Personnel mines had been giving trouble. Gigantic craters, in whose 
yawning depths no spark of warmth had been generated for countless cycles of 
time, were surrounded by vast plains eroded to the dead level of a windless 
sea. Every lofty object cast a sharply outlined shade of impenetrable 
blackness, beside which the weak light of the sun became a dazzling glare. One 
land-mass, one vortex. Four hands--if hands they could be called--manipulated 
levers and wheels with infinite delicacy of touch, and with scarcely a splash 
the immense mass of the Nevian vessel struck the water and glided to a stop 
within a foot of its exact berth. 

"James says that he can finish building this starship in a few weeks," Delcamp 
told them, flatly. Thionite. Definitely. For good. There were no breaks, no 
marks of violence, and yet nothing was intact. 

"What d'you make of it, Mart? That's water all right--copper-sulphate solution, 
just like the Osnomian and Urvanian oceans--and nothing else visible. Ferber 
and the rest of the Board--stupidity _uber alles_!--think all us Ops and Primes 
are psycho and that the ship will never even lift. Which, by the way, is the 
truth. " 

"Fighting? Why, you seemed friendly enough. " 

Neither Belle nor Garlock had recovered; both faces showed strain and drain. 

"Lots of 'em--here's one right here," and at the next landing he opened a 
vacuum-insulated steel door, snapped on a light, and waved his hand. And unless 
something could be done about loose vortices before too many years, the 
consequences would be really serious. More were arriving constantly, of course, 
but the flood had become a trickle; the narrow way, worming upward from the 
city along the cliffs stark side, was almost bare of traffic. 



He found himself seated in a narrow canoe of metal, immediately behind the 
pilot, who sat at a small control panel in the bow. "While we're out of touch 
with United Worlds you, as captain of the ship and director of the project, are 
Boss, with a capital B. If you're still thinking of blistering my fanny, don't 
try it. " 

"Fair enough. " 

Brandon, at the controls, scanning his screens narrowly, dropped the vessel 
down to within a mile or two of the point of origin of Stevens' carrier beam 
without incident; then spoke to Westfall, at his side, with a grin. " She shook 
hands warmly. "If there's any one thing in the universe I never had _you_ 
figured for, it's a dog in the manger. " 

"Yes? You lie in your teeth, Cleander, but I love it. I hated like the devil to 
let her work that way, but. But she's got brains, ability, and guts--guts 
enough to supply the Women's Army Corps. . . . . . but they knew that. Then he 
leaped into his own. Brandon, in his light remark that the two made one real 
scientist, had far understated the case--those two brains, each so powerful and 
each so perfectly complementing the other, comprised the master-scientist who 
was to revolutionize science completely in a few short years. With a mighty 
lunge of his powerful body he wrenched out the support and with a continuation 
of the same motion, he brought the jagged oak head of his terrible club down 
full upon the crown of the second hexan, who had already torn one guard apart 
and was leaping toward Czuv, his hereditary foe. 

The enormous duplex cone of the Vorkuls did not attempt to repeat the maneuver, 
but divided into two single cones, one of which darted toward each point of 
rupture. pgdp. net) 





Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this 

file which includes the original illustrations. 

See 21647-h. It's your move, Jarve. I've been getting them ready for this for 
weeks. The Masters had qualities and abilities now unknown to any of us. They 
got out. The Galactic Patrol will not be able to stop at being the supreme and 
only authority in inter-systemic affairs. " 

"So will you, Junior, believe me. " 

"Oh, I believe it, all right. "We operate, when we must operate at all openly, 
with the absolutely irreducible minimum of personal risk. Don't worry, I'm not 
going to give him a break. Alcantro! 

"Here!" 

"Round up the gang, will you, and figure me out a screen and a set of meters 
that will indicate an open band? We lose too much time feeling around anyhow, 
and we're too apt to take one on the chin while we're doing it. Also, you ought 
to make it so it'll shoot a jolt into the opening, while you're at it," said 
Brandon. I will myself, however, slay the unfit. Probably fairly important, 
some way or other, though, since it's our job to see that the silly, gutless 
things keep on living. You see, you're a man--you can't possibly despise and 
detest that slimy stinker either in the same way or as much as I do. " 

Hilton gulped twice before he could speak. The number will approach nineteen 
thousand very nearly. Your method of indirect action is probably the only one 
that will succeed. Your lips are black, and your hair is a funny kind of color, 
halfway between black and old rose, with a little green and. " 

"Oh, thank you, sir; that is truly wonderful!" And Dark Lady sat cross-legged 
on the rug at Hilton's feet and busied herself with the esoteric rites of Old 
Avignon. Those Arpales aren't very intelligent, you Arpalones are extremely so. 
Petrine must be and shall be given her rightful place in the galactic 
fellowship of free, independent, and cooperative worlds. So must any and all 
planets whose peoples wish to adhere to Civilization instead of to tyranny and 
despotism. Frowning in thought, he turned to Newton and spoke seriously and 
slowly. 

"Immediately after the loss of our super-plane, with the supposed death of 
King, Breckenridge, and myself, the other Tellurian officers were returned to 
Europa, since even they could be of no assistance to us Callistonians in our 
struggle against the new, high-acceleration vessels of the hexans. "I did not 
expect the Lord Llosir to appear in the flesh at this time; I know not when or 
ever he will deign to appear to us again. Anyway, I _must_ stand it, so why 
worry about it?" 

"'At-a-girl!" cheered Seaton. Our machine-guns got him, but not until after he 
heaved a bomb. "' 

"What d'you mean 'if the next conjunction is _allowed_ to occur?'" interjected 
Seaton. "Nobody can stop it. Hi, Larry, mighty glad to see you. She was about 
five feet four. She is an expert stenographer, and showed such ability that she 
was promoted until she became my secretary. 

"What's your name, Miss?" he asked, finally. " Her voice was almost 
unrecognizable, broken in retching agony. Crane and Margaret talked easily, but 
at intervals. 

"I never had a valet before, but go as far as you like if it pleases you," 
remarked Seaton, as he began to throw off his clothes. Of course, the more 
power they waste on us, the quicker we can take them; but I don't want much 
more of that beam, I'll tell the world--I just about had heart failure before 
they cut off!" 

The massive heptagon was now drifting back toward Jupiter at constant velocity. 
Dope enough--point oh four seven. " 

As Stevens had told Nadia, the message was completely informing to those for 
whom it was intended, and soon Brandon's answer was flying toward the distant 
satellite. "You're the Director. I am heading for the place where it will be 
when we reach it. With that in place, the rest of the ship will go fast. There, 
after a brief glance around the room, he coiled up beside a fellow officer who, 
with one eye, was negligently reading a scroll held in three or four hands; 
while with another eye, poised upon its slender pedicle, he watched a moving 
picture upon a television screen. Maybe between us we can figure out where to 
start. Maybe you're worth saving, after all. " 

"I take it, then, that there is no objection to her going?" Samms asked. There 
is an optimum mass, a point of maximum efficiency of firepower as balanced 
against loss of maneuverability, for any craft designed for attack," Kedy 
thought, in his most professional manner. Watch its destruction and cringe--and 
know, in your suffering, that the more you suffer, the greater shall be our 
enjoyment. " 

He abandoned his desk and established the necessary connections between the 
visiray apparatus and the controls of his board. DuQuesne. 

After a long discussion, in which every detail of the plan was carefully 
considered, the two men left the restaurant, by different exits. It's spelled 
R-U-N, run. 'Sa shame, too--what's the use of wasting it, now that we've got it 
all made?" 

"We are not done yet," cautioned Westfall, and even as he spoke an alarm bell 
burst into strident clamor--one of their far-flung detector screens was telling 
the world that it had encountered a dangerous frequency. The new ultra-lights 
flared instantly along the line automatically laid down by the detector, and 
upon the closely ruled micrometer screen of Brandon's desk there glowed in 
natural color the image of a globular space-ship, approaching them with 
terrific speed. 

"That is all from me. Breadth and depth and scope of imagination and of vision; 
yet almost incredible will-power and stamina and resolve. . . . . " Jack's 
thought snapped off as he tuned to a local Lensman. "Have you any idea how fast 
this bird can fly?" 

"Well, I have heard you speak of traveling with the velocity of light, but that 
is overdrawn, isn't it?" 

"Not very much. . " the worried voice of the System's ace newscaster came in. 
"Since neither Jim nor I need an assistant any more than we need tails, it was 
designed to give you girls something to do. Think over, very carefully, what I 
have said, for as far as I am concerned, this world has no place for Omans who 
will not obey orders. " 

The Titanian commander approved the idea, and the transmitting field was 
quickly installed. 

They were agreed. 

"Look here, girl; you've got to learn how to sleep. "I had no idea. " 

They removed their armor, and Costigan explained in detail the changes which 
must be made in the Triplanetary field generators. "But no damage done--just 
the opposite. " 

"Well, the armor is gone. I can shoot faster and straighter than you can, and 
would shoot it out of your hand. I gathered that it is something like a 
polyhydric alcohol and something like a substituted hydrocarbon, and yet 
different from either in that it contains flourin in loose combination. " 

"Why bother about one little flash, after all that really did happen?" asked 
Clio, curiously. " 

"Certainly, we must and we will," stated DuQuesne calmly. "Probably, then, the 
other was--but no matter, we had to have the iron. Bring the boat in without 
converting it, so that we may study at our leisure both the beings and their 
mechanisms," and Nerado swung his own visiray beam into the emergency boat, 
seeing there the armored figures of Clio Marsden and the two Triplanetary 
officers. " 



Ardan superdreadnoughts in their massed thousands poured out through Ardvor's 
one-way screen. But it cleared things up no end--it untied a million knots. But 
by the Mighty Seven, I shall make myself wrap around one hexan, for my 
brother's sake," and his coils tightened unconsciously. What you know as 
'crime' is unknown. " 

"Oh, of course--Stevens, the great Olympic high and fancy diver! I would 
_never_ have connected our own Doctor Stevens, the eminent mathematical 
physicist, with the King of the Springboard. " She shook her head vigorously. 
Power was therefore fed to the driving projectors, and each scientist, 
electrician, and mechanic bent to the task of repairing the ruined generators; 
rebuilding them to handle any load which the converters could possibly put upon 
them. We generate all we can with the materials and knowledge at our disposal, 
but we never have enough. In it we may find instruments or devices as yet 
unknown to us. _Our_ colonies are all within twenty six light-years of Earth 
except Aldebaran II, which is fifty seven, but which drew a lot of people, in 
spite of the distance, because it was so nearly identical with Earth. On the 
other hand, the Nevians, from a distance of over a hundred light-years, found 
_us_. Fermius' helmet sported three brilliantly-colored plumes, his shield and 
cuirass, enameled in half the colors of the spectrum, looked as though they 
were being worn for the first time. 

Five yards apart, the gladiators stopped and wheeled to face the podium upon 
which Nero lolled. 

Then, finally, ocean waves of ever-increasing height and violence rolled in 
against the new-formed shore. They had had many vitriolic arguments, but 
neither had made any motion toward his weapon. 

"Now comes the ticklish part of the business," Costigan informed the others. 
Then hordes of young men and young women went suddenly and briefly to work; at 
least four in every precinct of the entire nation. 

Everyone knew that the Patrol had won a magnificent victory; but nobody knew 
who or what the enemy had been. 

Seaton, seizing her instinctively, neglected his own anchorage and they hung in 
the air together, while Crane and Margaret, each holding a strap, laughed with 
unrestrained merriment. A good, far point, but not quite far enough. Our 
equivalent of your chess, however, is what we call the 'Visualization of the 
Cosmic All'. We lived through it. They couldn't touch us. They should not and 
can not be judged by the higher, finer standards of a softer, gentler day. Then 
their generators went out, and pretty soon two peculiar-looking strangers 
entered. Without saying a word he waved a hand and the others looked. We need 
something which will identify any representative of Civilization, positively 
and unmistakably, wherever he may be. 

"While we were unconscious, Miss Vaneman, we had probably attained a velocity 
of something like seven billion four hundred thirteen million miles per second, 
and that is the approximate speed at which we are now traveling. DUQUESNE, Ph. 
D. --two or three times--and she knows all about slipsticks and isotopes and 
she very definitely is _not_ a cuddly little brunette. Remember?" 

"Sure. But what makes you think I'm in love with Temple Bells?" 

"What?" Sandra tried to think of one bit of evidence, but could not. 

"Back to Tellus, sir?" The _Chicago's_ captain broke the strained silence. The 
other belief, that America had more adequate defenses and better-trained, more 
highly skilled defenders, would soon be put to test. Cross it, swing in a wide 
circle toward the peninsula on which sits Middlemarch Castle, and in three 
days. . no more waves coming, but they say to expect attacks from low-flying 
combat rockets--there goes the alert! On your toes, fellows--but there isn't a 
thing on Sector A's screen. . . you tell 'em, Sammy, I've got company here. The 
barber's name will be Antonio Carbonero and he will be left-handed. But since 
most, if not all, of the parties involved will probably be included in your 
Operation Mateese, and since a finding, either positive or negative, would be 
tremendously significant, we feel emboldened to ask you to keep this point in 
mind. Carroll and the Messrs. Together, and with such a goal, I'm sure we can. 
" 

"All set, Dick?" asked Dorothy, appearing in the doorway. Where we come from, 
most human beings are fighters. 

He reached his destination, which was of course spy-ray proofed, late Sunday 
night. "But perhaps Six has not explained these things to you. 

"According to the concept you fellows just helped me develop, it wouldn't have 
made any difference how many they sent," Hilton replied, thoughtfully. "Pipe 
down yourself, guy--if you weren't so darn dumb and didn't have such a complex, 
you'd know that you're the crack pilot of the outfit and wouldn't care who else 
knew it. " Stevens carefully covered and put away the calculating machine and 
other apparatus he had been using and turned again to the pilot. If we have to 
do that, let it be only as a last resort. . . . . . I'm trying to keep. . . . . 
. . . . do you suppose that they are waiting for Nerado?" 

"Probably. " 



"Here is the analysis of his screen, sir. Brookings," replied the subordinate. 
"They've got detectives from Prescott's all over the place. " 

Kinnison told, but fought to retain what consciousness he had. An intolerable 
weight rested upon his eyeballs, forcing them backward into his head. The 
passengers felt each hair striving to stand on end as the very air became more 
and more highly charged--and this was but the slight corona-loss of the 
frightful stream of destruction being hurled at the other space-cruiser, now 
scarcely a mile away! 

Seaton stared into number one visiplate, manipulating levers and dials as he 
drove the _Skylark_ hither and yon, dodging frantically, the while the 
automatic focusing devices remained centered upon the enemy and the enormous 
generators continued to pour forth their deadly frequencies. 

"We don't want them aboard, do we, Dick? There are too many of them. Most of 
the latter, however, and the girl acolytes and the thronging thousands of 
spectators, threw themselves flat on the hard ground. The remainder were so 
stunned by the unbelievable events of the attack that they had no initiative, 
but were willing to follow wherever the more valiant spirits led. Not a shell 
had struck her: all this damage had been done by flying fragments of the guns 
and of the dock itself; and Seaton and Crane, who had developed the new 
explosive, stood aghast at its awful power. Neither can you. What chance do you 
think there is of ever getting any real proof?" 

"Very little," Celeste admitted. I don't know what it is, but I believe it's 
fatal. . m. Catapults," he mused. "You were right, girl of my dreams--armor and 
bows and arrows wouldn't help us much right now. _Trust_ you!" 

"Thanks, old golf-shootist," and promises were made and received in a clasp 
from which Nadia's right hand, strong as it was, emerged slightly damaged. 

"By the way, what is your first name, fellow-traveller?" she asked in lighter 
vein. "You look like you're seeing ghosts! What did they do to you?" 

"Nothing--much. We propose to increase both. " 

"What are those mounds along the streets?" For some time Samms had been 
conscious of those long, low, apparently opaque structures; attracted to them 
because they were the only non-transparent objects within range of the 
Rigellian's mind. We're practically at Number One now," and James and Lola 
donned their scanners, ready for the job. " 

He glanced at the chronometer. A man stood in the middle of the Main; a man 
shaped very much like Garlock, but with long, badly-tousled hair and a bushy 
wilderness of fiery-red whiskers. Men and women, wrapped in oil-soaked garments 
smeared with pitch and chained to posts, make splendid torches indeed. Nadia 
studied the foundry for a moment, interested, but unimpressed. 

"Mother! Claire! Oh, you three wonder-workers!" She addressed simultaneously 
the distant Terrestrials and the scientists at her side, while broken 
exclamations, punctuated by ominous, crackling snaps, came from the laboring 
amplifier. "What've you got on your chest?" 

"Your foot slipped on the Jap," the stranger replied. "He crabbed the game 
right. What a _man_! Belle Bellamy, you ought to be kicked from here to Tellus. 
. . " 

"There's plenty!" she snapped. "Still fighting as usual, I see! What kind of 
knights are you, anyway, to rescue us poor damsels in distress, and then never 
even know that we're alive?" A tall, willowy brunette had seen the two 
physicists as she entered the saloon, and came over to their table, a hand 
outstretched to each in cordial greeting. 

"Ho, Verna!" both men exclaimed, and came to their feet as they welcomed the 
smiling, graceful newcomer. "How can any possible brain take so much of _this_ 
stuff without damage?" 

"It does not reach the brain, Master. Kinnison. Have a 'copter come down and 
pick up Samms and myself on tractors. "Not the slightest. "I want to know just 
where we stand. The commander is dying of a self-inflicted wound and I have 
important work to do. " 

"Okay, it does make sense, then. Any desired depth of water was available and 
plainly marked, from the fenced-off shallows where the smallest children 
splashed to the forty feet of liquid crystal which received the diver who cared 
to try his skill from one of the many spring-boards, flying rings, and 
catapults which rose high into the air a short distance away from the entrance. 
They simply don't exist. " 

"That's about the right dope, I guess. 

"Yes. 

"Mentally, I can have no desire. "The life-principle is unknowable to the 
finite mind, as is the All-Controlling Force. " 

"Sure I have, Skipper. It was still stiflingly hot; its air was still reeking 
with the stench of burning lubricant, insulation, and metal; its floor was half 
covered by a semi-molten mass of what had once been vital machinery. Didn't it 
sock you, too, Belle?" 

"Uh-uh," she said, more than half bitterly. I want it straight from you. . 
should think they'd _have_ to radiate from a center, and so be spherical," 
Brandon cogitated. "However, we've got nothing corkscrewy enough to go through 
them, so we'll have to stand by. I can still recognize a few of the 
constellations, even though they are all pretty badly distorted. You want to 
know why?" 

"I think I know why. " 

"Don't be any more of a fool than you have to, Brookings. There were the 
landing-lights of Crane Field, seven peculiarly-arranged searchlights throwing 
their mighty beams upward into the night. The telephone operators were 
hand-picked, men of very short memories, carefully trained never to look at a 
face and never to remember a name or a number. We've got to chance it sometime, 
though, if we can ever get away, so we might as well do it now. " 

"You said it, chum. . . . . " her voice died away. " 

The fuel arrived. 

"And Lola, those 'Guardians' out there. Propelling rockets viciously aflame, it 
twisted and looped around the incandescent rods of destruction so thickly and 
starkly outlined, under perfect control; unaffected by the hideous distortion 
of all ether-borne signals. Through a pirate screen it went, and under the 
terrific blast of its detonation the entire midsection of the stricken 
battleship vanished. Every ether-defense of the _Hyperion_ vanished, and her 
acceleration dropped to a quarter of its normal value. And from the gargantuan 
mouth of the Cone there spewed a miles-thick column of energy so raw, so stark, 
so incomprehensibly violent that it must have been seen to be even dimly 
appreciated. They then withdrew to Arisia, leaving their younger, weaker, 
partially-developed fellows to do whatever they could against mighty Eddore. 
They stamped the ship's papers without either reading or checking them. Then 
they set out in the biplane, to try out the new weapon in a lonely place where 
the exploding shells could do no damage. " 

"Dunark of Osnome is already informed as to what Osnome is to do. 

"We'd better eat _something_, I suppose," Belle said, thoughtfully. "I may take 
advice from you on some things and from Crowninshield on others, but I am in 
charge!" 

"All x--it's a relief, at that," and Brandon and Westfall went to join their 
fellow-scientists in the designated room of the space-cruiser. I thought it 
might be a whale at first, but it is a boat and it is what we are aiming for. 
Now, about the ship we want. What sun? Where?" 

"I don't know. It isn't a question of whether or not to destroy a 
population--the only question is which population is to be destroyed. There it 
comes back again!" 



Before their staring eyes a vague, nebulous something moved rapidly upward 
through the floor and passed upward through the ceiling. 

Would there, or would there not, be cities? While he had not known at all 
exactly what to expect, he did not believe that there would be any large cities 
upon Arisia. Torpedoes were futile against that wall of energy. The most 
fiercely driven rays of the fishes flamed incandescent against it, in vain. 

Of what use is it to pit such puny and trivial things as _facts_ against 
rock-ribbed, iron-bound, entrenched AUTHORITY? 

The five, however, _knew_; and Deston and Jones had several long and highly 
unsatisfactory discussions; at first with Adams, and later between themselves. 
He curled up into one half of the ball; the other half closed over him and 
locked. Thus, when the chance for escape came, he was ready for it. . . " he 
went on, pointing out large, heavy women wearing extremely extreme gowns, 
"Stand here, right over him. 

"I understand your doubt. But here again nothing was to be seen of the land 
itself. 

The material lining of the ghastly moat was the only substance capable of 
resisting the action of its contents, and now, that lining destroyed by the 
uprooting of the fortress, that corrosive, brilliantly mobile liquid cascaded 
down in to the trough and added its hellish contribution to the furious scene. 
He snapped it, and in the instant of its closing a vast, calm peace descended, 
blanket-like. The room was a replica of the other Osnomian dining hall they had 
seen and the women were decorated with the same barbaric splendor of 
scintillating gems. So did the next trial, a vicious forehand cut. Cleveland 
flinched involuntarily and seized his arm-rests in a spasmodic clutch as he 
watched this, the first inertialess space-approach; and even Rodebush, who knew 
better than anyone else what to expect, held his breath and swallowed hard at 
the unbelievable rate at which the two vessels were rushing together. 

Rodebush drove his finger down, and instantly over both men there came a 
sensation akin to a tremendously intensified vertigo; but a vertigo as far 
beyond the space-sickness of weightlessness as that horrible sensation is 
beyond mere Earthly dizziness. "You have the most sensitive receptors of us 
all. " 

"Uh-uh. And as the map of that operation spread itself in his mind, he grew 
enthusiastic. 

At full dark, a red glare flared into the sky from Caesar's garden and the 
gladiators, deployed now along the highway, dashed across it and seemed to 
wrestle briefly with cloaked figures. "The way it is, we've each got a 
grandson--it'd be tough to have to share one with _you_. Second, the Stretts of 
old did not completely destroy the humanity of the world Ardu. It had been up 
for more than three minutes, and they have undoubtedly concentrated everything 
possible upon us during that time. " 

"I know it, but. "There is nothing secret about our mission. Van Schravendyck, 
of our own laboratory, is nearly as good as either Seaton or DuQuesne. He has 
done a lot of work on radio-activity and that sort of thing, and I think he 
would like to work on it. 

The door opened, and through it there waddled, rolled, or crawled a metal-clad 
monstrosity--a thing with wheels, legs and writhing tentacles of jointed 
bronze; a thing possessed of defensive screens sufficiently powerful to absorb 
the full blast of the Triplanetary projectors without effort. "You must have 
had help to get that far off--no one man could possibly be as wrong as you are. 
Why, you played with it as though it were a knitting-needle, and when I wanted 
to wake you up with it, I could hardly lift it. " 

"Foster!" Ferber yelled. She leaped to her feet, her eyes shooting sparks. 
"Even if I do talk you'll kill me anyway. " 

The carrier wave hissed into the receiver, forestalling Brandon's fiery reply, 
followed closely by the code signals they had been expecting. "You have all the 
essential facts right there. We all, including you, believe that the 
Psychologist is right in holding that the reaction of the other nations to such 
action would be both unfavorable and violent. " 

Sawtelle jerked a thumb at Hilton, who followed him out into the corridor. No 
fragment was large enough to be navigable or dangerous and each was sharply 
cut, as though sheared from its neighbor by some gigantic curved blade. He 
barreled into the intersection; his step-plate ground the concrete as he made a 
screaming left turn. He hooked one steel-shod foot around one of the table's 
legs and braced the other against its top. 

"Perkins," he said softly, "M. . he had my direct orders not to do battle 
'gainst any force, however slight-seeming, but to withdraw forthwith into the 
castle, which was to be kept stocked to withstand a siege of months. 

Swiftly he came to a decision and threw off his suit, revealing the body of a 
Hercules--a body ready for any demand he could put upon it. Space-hooks bit and 
tore. Pikes and lances were driven with the full power of brawny arms. Here and 
there could be seen trooper and hexan, locked together in fierce embrace far 
from any hand-line--six limbs against four, all ten plied with abandon in 
mortal, hand-to-hand, foot-to-foot combat. Look back, see how far up the hill 
you've come, and then balance one hundred and twenty days against ten years. So 
appalling was their velocity that their ship was bathed in the light of that 
sun for only a short time, then was again surrounded by the indescribable 
darkness. Okay?" 

"So you don't want to let the rest of us in on it. " Karns's level stare was a 
far cry from the way he had looked at his chief a moment before. " 

"I'm not sure, but I've reworked our Prime Fields into one and made a couple of 
other changes. 

"There, we can see what they're doing now," and DuQuesne anchored the vessel 
with an attractor. When that time comes, he receives in one day all the 
knowledge of his specialty which has been accumulated by his predecessors 
during many thousands of years of intensive study. " 

"It might, at that. We, I mean," he corrected, absently. " 

The orator seated himself and there was a deafening clamor of cheering as the 
nobles formed themselves into an escort of honor and conducted the two couples 
to their apartments. He couldn't, very well, because after you're married, it 
would. At first, quite a few young women, at sight of his unusual physique, had 
sent out tentative feelers of thought; and some men had wondered, in the same 
tentative and indirect fashion, who he was and where he came from. " 

"Yes, it will take time," agreed Stevens, remembering what the Titanian captain 
had told him concerning the construction of those plants--generators which had 
been in continuous and automatic operation for thousands of Saturnian years. _" 



For seconds Hilton had been trying to break into her hopeless monotone; finally 
he succeeded. "The trouble with you is, you know altogether too damned much 
that isn't so. You'll be ready to transfer?" 

"I'll be ready," and the Quartermaster's ex-clerk went to his quarters and 
packed his dunnage-bag. And as they strolled along: 

"Of course you won't actually _need_ a job, ever, or my money, either. Or is 
it? Ores came into being with the crusts of the planets; they change 
appreciably only with the passage of geologic time. _Especially_ 
serving-wenches! He likes little, cuddly baby-talkers, who pretend to be 
utterly spineless and completely brainless--eh, Jack?" 

"Ouch! Touché, Jill--but maybe I had it coming to me, at that. Let's call it 
off, shall we? I'll be seeing you two, hither or yon. " 



Breakfast over, they started down the valley, Stevens carrying his helmet under 
his arm. " 

"Maybe I should apologize, then, but as a matter of fact I have no idea 
whatever as to what you wouldn't do. They glanced at each other and Dorothy 
voiced the thought of both as she said: 

"How can you, Kofedix Dunark? In this horrible light we both look perfectly 
dreadful. . more shame to those pusillanimous half-breed midgets of the court. 
I'll argue with you, when we have time, about some of your points, but the last 
one--if it's valid--has tremendous force. I'll analyze it, find out what is in 
it, deposit it on some copper, shoot an electrolytic current through it, and 
make a lot of wise motions generally, and have a darn good time besides. I'll 
analyze it, find out what is in it, deposit it on some copper, shoot an 
electrolytic current through it, and make a lot of wise motions generally, and 
have a darn good time besides. " 



In Brookings' office, DuQuesne told of the constant surveillance over him. 
"That must have been a terrific job. "Coincidence is as meaningless as paradox. 
I think they found out that--barring freaks--the best minds are in the best 
bodies. " 

"'Tis not enough of explanation. Go on. " 

Deston went ahead, and spoke almost steadily for thirty minutes. I've been 
doing a lot of thinking. . . . . . . " 



Lomarr's army set out at dawn. Then: 

"Great Brain, advise us," Ynos said. "Grand Lady Neldine--that title isn't 
exact, but close--wondered why I didn't respond at all, either way. However, 
she didn't make a point of it, and I let her wonder; but we'll have to decide 
by tomorrow morning what to do, and it'll have to be airtight. Two sister-ships 
of the _Kondal_ appeared as if by magic in answer to Dunark's call, and their 
attractors aided greatly in handling the unruly collection of wreckage. The two 
observers saw with amazement that after brief attention from an ant-like 
ground-crew, the original four men climbed back into their warship and she 
again shot into the fray, apparently as good as ever. Osbert F. Harkins--was 
the first to give tongue. "What a _wonderful_ job! Why, everybody's here that I 
really like at all!" 

That sentiment was, of course, unanimous. How can we of Lomarr _ever_ attain 
comfort and happiness if more die each year than are born? We are too few. It 
was a wild yell, followed by words not directed at Deston at all. You have, of 
course, noticed that it looks transparent, but that it is not. " Silencing 
Kinnison's inarticulate protests, Samms went on: "First, you'll have no 
difficulty in talking to an audience as you've just talked to me. The air above 
them was full of aircraft of all shapes and sizes, and occasionally the image 
of one of that flying horde flared into violet splendor upon the screen as it 
was caught in the mighty, roving beam of one of the twelve ultra-light 
projectors under test. The small vessel no longer struggled, nor even moved, 
but was merely resisting passively. At the same time others of our party will 
take the palace and kill every man, woman, and child adherent to Nero. " 

His hearers listened, impressed by his earnestness, but plainly not 
understanding his meaning. "Why, he wasn't--when did _he_ get married?" 

"The day after we arrived here," replied the surgeon. She hasn't yet. She was 
wider and thicker than was the Earthwoman; with heavier bones forming a wider 
and deeper frame. 

"You two do not need to be announced," the attractive young woman smiled. 
Knewst I was coming?" 

"Yes, Lord. Orders came by helio but now. Under observation. Are you lying in 
your teeth or are you dumb enough to believe it yourself?" 

"Neither one," the Engineer insisted, stubbornly. "How do you want to handle 
it?" 

"Run a search pattern. Undoubtedly. In fact, there is a group, a club, of such 
persons. And if he _had_ to fight, he could; and, physically, he was 
wonderfully well equipped for just such activity. For Cloud's vague forebodings 
were materialized, and more; the staggeringly immense energy of the vortex 
merged with that of the detonating duodec to form an utterly incomprehensible 
whole. 

"Could you hold your beam, Randolph?" Samms' voice cut sharply through the daze 
of stupefaction which held spellbound most of the denizens of the Hill. With 
the aid of the Rovolon you have brought us, I am confident that we shall be 
able to work out a satisfactory solution of the various problems involved. We 
perform no physical or manual labor save for exercise, as all our mechanical 
work is done by forces. We were made to believe that our only hope of continued 
existence was to meet you and destroy you in space; for if you were allowed to 
reach Petrine every man, woman, and child on the planet would either be killed 
outright or tortured to death. Jim's job is the only one that's definite. He'll 
have to work full time on nebular configurations. If we hit inhabited planets 
he'll have to add their star-charts to his own. So they're strictly neutral, 
eh? Well, I'll tell him 'hi,' anyway. Besides, I promised Captain King ages ago 
that he could marry me, so go get him and we'll do it now. " 

He stared at her helplessly, then swung on Larry. "But you're still the Boss; 
they'll do anything you tell them to. The Masters were always working toward 
more power, not less. 

Temple scarcely blushed at all, she was so engrossed in trying to find out 
whether or not anyone was noticing any change. Wherever you go, I go," she 
replied in a voice inaudible to the others. He had to make speeches, each of 
which was climaxed by a tremendous roar of "TO LIBERATION DAY!" 

"No Lensman material here, you say, Rod?" Samms asked, after the first 
city-shaking demonstration was over. 

He was more interested in the synthetic fluoro-silicon flesh, and paused long 
enough to get a general idea of its growth and application. 

The Inspector pointed a thought; all four followed it. "They knew we were 
coming, even before we got to Fuel Bin. I don't think they suspect you at all, 
and they won't unless they get some better methods. In all else, my men do as 
they please. But the time had been altogether too short. An' with a burley 
riggin' she's got to make damn near a double cut--seven foot inside figger--so 
any way you look at it you ain't goin' to cut no two foot to the minute. " 

"I was hoping you wouldn't check my figures, but you do. "You wouldn't be 
holding anything else back, would you?" 

"Nothing important, sir. . . but the hunch was getting stronger and stronger 
all the time. They knew it better than anyone else could, and felt it more 
keenly. They were also, to all intents and purposes and except for death by 
violence, immortal. " 

"Thanks. "From Northport. " 

The lieutenant found his voice as he surrendered the instrument. " 

"I'll devote the imponderable force of the intellect to the problem and check 
with you later. Look at this spool of tape, and it's only the first one. Did 
you ever see a better-matched couple? Will you give me a try, Belle?" 

"I will not," she said, emphatically. It was rumored around the Bureau last 
night that Seaton was going insane, that he had wrecked a lot of his apparatus 
and couldn't explain what had happened. There were no elevations, no 
depressions, no visible markings whatever--not even a meteor crater. 

"That tears it, Belle--busts it wide open. Then armed, more-or-less-armored men 
ran back to the scene of their reveling. She therefore put on one of the 
headsets, motioning the men to do the same, and approached Kromodeor with the 
other, repeating the hexan word of friendly import. "Good Lord, Clio, why 
didn't you call me?" 

"Oh, I'm all right, except for being a little jittery. " 

As Perkins slid out, Brookings spoke into his telephone, and soon Chambers, his 
chief chemist, appeared. A marshal and a lieutenant-marshal of the Solarian 
System; a general and a lieutenant-general of the planet Sol Three. 



_ATTACK FROM SPACE_ 

The enemy spacefleet arrowed toward the armored mountain--nerve center of the 
Galactic Patrol. "We found air and Earth-like conditions here; we probably will 
elsewhere. The power was on exactly forty-eight hours, since that is the life 
of that particular bar under full current. The concentration of uranexite. " 

"What would you say, then, to the idea of this office being our real 
headquarters, of that little package there being our real business?" He swung 
the safe door shut, spun the knob. "Details, girl; mere details. I've seen 
people who looked like money in the bank and who smelled like a bouquet of 
violets that you couldn't trust half the length of Nerado's neck. You see, 
fields of force are all right in most places, but I've got to have one tube, 
and it's got to have the hardest possible vacuum. Ours is a little oxygen, 
mixed with a lot of inert ingredients. Theirs is oxygen, heavily laced with 
flourin. It's _reactive_, no fooling! However, something pretty violent must be 
necessary to carry on body reactions at such a temperature as theirs. " Then, 
realizing that the Rigellian could have no conception of his meaning, he 
continued quickly: 

"The vibrations in the atmosphere, from sixteen cycles per second up to about 
nine or ten thousand. 

"Don't stop to listen--keep on writing!" commanded Nadia. 

"And that's another thing I don't like. I'm shoving off at twelve o'clock 
tonight. " 

"I've heard a lot about you, Doctor. "Definitely I couldn't. A good big man can 
always take a good little one, you know. " 

"Then you can beat those horrible Fenachrone, after all!" cried Dorothy, and 
threw herself into her husband's arms. In fact, I can say that we Guardians of 
Humanity would approve such action. Instantly the refractory arenak turned an 
intense, dazzling white and more than a foot of the forty-eight-inch skin of 
the vessel melted away, like snow before an oxy-acetylene flame: melting and 
flying away in molten globes and sparkling gases--the refrigerating coils 
lining the hull were of no avail against the concentrated energy of that 
titanic thrust. 

"Hashed again!" growled Breckenridge. Instead, he lowered his burden to the 
floor, spread her out flat, and sought out and removed item after item of 
wiring, apparatus, and offensive and defensive armament. Another reversal, 
another dash; and this time, so disorganized were the foes and so feeble the 
beaming, not a single Patrol vessel was lost. Not until they had been placed 
upon cushions in the middle room and the heavy metal doors had been locked upon 
them did they again find themselves able to use arms or legs. . . . but under 
certain conditions. . . He's back on the boat now and we've shot him from all 
angles. " 

"I'm amazed," James played it straight. " 

"A smart idea. " 

"Hence the probability approaches unity that any more such ignorant meddling as 
this obnoxious Tuly did well result almost certainly in failure and death. 

"He's really giving 'em hell," Northrop said, admiringly. His face was a 
yellowish-gray white, his tendoned hands gripped rigidly the arms of his chair. 
The mouth snapped shut, the eye retracted, and heaving, rippling surges 
traversed that powerful body as he struggled madly against the unbreakable 
shackles of steel binding him to the floor. After a time a staccato burst of 
articulate speech issued from the box, and Costigan saw a great light. After a 
time, the older couple left the room, the lawyer going into his study to work, 
as he always did in the evening. All three stared into the plate, seeing only 
an infinity of emptiness, marked only by the infinitely remote and coldly 
brilliant stars. We've got a couple of days yet--just about time to finish up. 
" 



"What's this?" asked DuQuesne. If I'd have thought to recalculate your actual 
Fahrenheit degrees into our loro. If you don't feel anything there, it's safe 
for you to talk, as loud as you please. 

"I will not. "Pretty nearly had them that time. We're stretching this projector 
about six hundred percent, but we've got to make this connection. I don't 
believe he can receive anything, sealed up as he is, and he can't have 
accumulators enough more efficient than ours to make up the difference, can he, 
Quince?" 

"It is quite possible. Strap down, you two, because they may go out entirely!" 

"Do you think that you can pull away from them, Conway?" Clio was staring in 
horrified fascination into the plate, watching the pictured vessel increase in 
size, moment by moment. " 

"When the _Sliver_ really cuts loose it means a rough party, all right," 
Cleveland assented, snapping about his body the heavy spring-straps of his 
deeply cushioned seat, "but I'm just as anxious to get back to the Hill as 
anybody can be to get me there. They knew what they had to do and did it; 
furiously, but with care and precision. They assured him that they would do 
anything they could to alleviate his mental suffering, but that since he was a 
museum piece he must see, himself, that he must be kept on display for a short 
time. . . " she paused. " 

"Stay here, sir? Why, he'd _kill_ me! I'm off the air for a minute," this last 
thought was a conspiratorial whisper. So you, Fred, and Lyman, take the first 
trick; the rest of us will get some sleep. 

The planning of the starship _Pleiades_ had been difficult in the extreme; its 
construction almost impossible. Big ones, but high; headed for targets well to 
the west. Nothing close enough to worry about. " 

"That's the second idea you've had since I've known you, Dicky," Dorothy smiled 
at Crane. "Why, we have almost infinite power--unlimited--sufficient for a 
lifetime of high expenditure!" 

But Roger made no reply, for the time of departure was at hand. 

"More like tanks," he disagreed, "except that they've got legs, wheels _and_ 
treads--and arms, cutters, diggers, probes and conveyors--and _look_ at the way 
those buckets dip solid rock!" 

The fantastic machine was moving very slowly along a bench or shelf that it was 
making for itself as it went along. And when, after a few days, his stentorian 
"Nothing Down!" called forth a "Nothing but a little fine stuff!" and a handful 
of grit and pebbles, he knew that he had been accepted into the undefined, 
unwritten, and unofficial, yet nevertheless intensely actual, fellowship of 
hard-rock men. 

Clean-up was going nicely, at the union rate of six hours on and eighteen hours 
off. Everyone there had seen him with his own eyes. Everyone there had heard 
his voice; a voice of a quality impossible for any mortal being, human or 
otherwise, to produce; a voice heard, not with the ears, which would have been 
ordinary enough, but by virtue of some hitherto completely unknown and still 
completely unknowable inner sense or ability evocable only by the god. "Don't 
you _see_, you've done enough? That now you're going too far? That these 
twenty-odd men, having had their minds opened and having been given insight 
into what is possible, will go forward instead of backward?" 

"Forward? With such people as the Prime Ministers, the labor and business 
leaders, the bosses and the gangsters to cope with? Do you think they've got 
spines stiff enough for the job?" 

"I'm sure of it. . blackmail. . . . . . " 



"Hey, I _like_ that!" Belle broke in. The other Rigellians were still in the 
room, but mentally, he and Dronvire were completely alone. We've got to chance 
it sometime, though, if we can ever get away, so we might as well do it now. We 
haven't drawn a frank from a plant in a month, and we've had to cut our field 
strength down to a whisper to keep from burning out our accumulators. You 
rescued us from them; do you not know them?" 

"No. But we'll get ours, huh?" 

Time went on. " 

"Each of those couples had one, and only one, child. Did you see it done?" 

"No. " 

"Oh, I'm still 'ace'? You can kiss me, then," and she raised her face toward 
his. "But if you haven't got. We can rivet and weld those seams, and things 
could be a lot worse--we are still breathing air!" 

In silence the lifeboat flashed onward, and half of Nevia's mighty globe was 
traversed before it was brought to a halt. " 

"Steady, old man--take it easy. One good thing, we won't have to hunt for him. 

The _Orion_ went back to Ardane and an eight-day wait began. "No reports from 
the rim, and all screens blank. The sneak-boat isn't due for a week, and from 
what you've said it probably won't get here. 

"How about it, Dot? Want to see some of your little friends again? If you do, 
I'll give them a shot and bring them out. "The boss just loves to wait 
meals--she'll burn me up for this!" 

He ran lightly toward "home," eager to tell his sweetheart that the long 
awaited moment had arrived--that power was now flowing into their accumulators. 
"Patroclus missed his chance and will never get another--a thousand on 
Fermius!" 

"Two thousand!" 

"Five thousand!" 

"Ten!" 

The fighters closed--swung--stabbed. Shields clanged vibrantly under the impact 
of fended strokes, swords whined and snarled. Back and forth--circling--giving 
and taking ground--for minute after endless minute that desperately furious 
exhibition of skill, of speed and of power and of endurance went on. 

"Is it permitted, oh noble Karfedo, that I reward your captive for his share in 
the victory?" he asked. "You see, they weren't designed to indicate such 
distances on such small objects as men, so I threw a million ohms in series 
with the impulse. " 

"Let me say something first," Kincaid said. The upper half of the vessel was 
still intact, the lower half a jumble of sharply-cut fragments. 

"Ha! Help--I hear footsteps approaching on jet-back," Garlock announced. "To 
keep 'em staggering we'll have to land slugging and beat 'em to every punch. 
Too small a charge scatters it around, in vortices which, while much smaller 
than the original, are still large enough to be self-sustaining. " The girl 
spoke carelessly, but managed to make it very clear that Jack Kinnison was just 
exactly the right size. As they were about to separate, Garlock said: 

"I don't like those hell-divers, yellow, green, or any other color; and you, 
Brownie, are very definitely not expendable. We intend to follow it in some 
suitable vehicle. " 

"Well, let's eat next! No human being can stand my aching void much longer. 
We're a _long_ ways from home. You _can_ relax a little, I see. It could be 
police, fire ambulance--_anything_. Two numbers flashed white upon his plate; 
his actual error, exact to the foot of distance and to the degree on the clock, 
measured and transmitted back to his board by instruments in his torpedo. 

"Is this IT?" the uniformed rider yelled, over the coughing thunder of the 
competing exhausts. " 

"Good. You were insulated from all other female charms by ye brazen Bells. I 
can _not_ be hypnotized. I'm a hundred times as strong as any man ever was. 
They'll check up on that ship with the expedition, by radio and what-not, and 
when they find out that it's clear out here--chop! Didn't get to see much, did 
you?" 

"No, they must have switched over to their accumulators almost instantly. " 

Dunark, as best man, entered the room some time later. "_What_ a brain!" 

"Sure I'm sure!" Ferber gloated. . He isn't like my father, much, but it seems 
as though I have known him for a thousand years!" 

"Hm. 

"Hi, Dad!" she greeted him gaily, with no slightest change in the expression of 
the face turned so engagingly to her partner's. His Lens was off. His eyes 
jammed themselves shut; his jaw-muscles sprang into bands and lumps as they 
clamped his teeth hard together. 

Being one of the only two "old" men there--and the other did not stay 
long--Kinnison, as a Junior Chemical Engineer, was not at first accepted 
without reserve. Stay tuned. Shift beta to forty-four and gamma to two 
sixty-five. " 



Rendezvous was made. "You can play God when you're on sked, with a ship-full of 
trained dogs to bite for you, but out here where nobody has ever come back from 
I make my own law--with _this_!" He patted his side pocket. . ah-h-h!" 

"Exactly. There will be room, and need, for the fullest powers of every 
Eddorian. 

"Welcome to Norlamin, Terrestrials," the deep, calm voice of the astronomer 
greeted them, and Orlon in the flesh shook hands cordially in the American 
fashion with each of them in turn, and placed around each neck a crystal chain 
from which depended a small Norlaminian chronometer-radiophone. "Can you spare 
a couple of minutes to think at me, Sandy?" 

"Minutes or hours, chief. I have never seen anything like it. I suspect 
pressure groups. " 

"Clayton to Port Admiral Kinnison. You, Knobos, and DalNalten all have keen and 
powerful minds. Nineteen years old. You think you've been places and done 
things. They undoubtedly have one of the best corps of detectives in the world. 
This idea of co-operation is so new to them that it actually dazed all four of 
them even to consider it. It took a long time to work out this tight-beam 
transmission of power, but it was fairly simple after they got it. " 

"And that's where you will go back and back and back, as you said about 
building the penstock?" 

"Back and back is right, if I can find all the necessary raw materials--that's 
what's probably going to put a lot of monkey-wrenches into the machinery. Art 
in the forefront of those few I spoke of. And take this not _too_ seriously, 
for I expect fully to live. " 

"Maybe, if we raise enough hell, we can make them fire us, too?" Drake 
suggested. "If you've got any part of a brain, slick chick, you'd better start 
using it. It will not be at all comfortable, but it will be better than having 
any more of us killed. Ever and anon a struggling part broke from its parent 
plant and darted away in independent existence; leaping upon and consuming or 
being consumed by a fellow creature equally monstrous. " 

"No? You, with your Prime's mind and your Prime's body, not have any children? 
And you tell _me_ not to be ridiculous?" 

That stopped Belle cold, but she wouldn't admit it. Its name was, both 
remembered, Lizoria; its two Primes were named Rezdo Semolo and Mirea 
Mitala--male and female, respectively. " 

"How do you, a captive prince of another nation, know these things?" asked 
Crane, doubtfully. She alighted beside Dunark's vessel, the _Kondal_, whose 
gorgeously-decorated crew of high officers sprang to attention as the four men 
stepped out. 

"You wish, sirs, to give me your orders verbally. Of prime interest here is the 
climactic charge of Lomarr's heavy horse--the Royal Guard--that ended it. I may 
be as far off the beam on one side as you are on the other. Here I am. My 
great-great-grandfather left some notes which, taken in connection with certain 
things I myself saw on the planetoid, prove beyond question that our Roger went 
to Harvard University at the same time he did. " 

"World?" the President asked in surprise. "She's phenomenal--good--I don't mean 
goody-goody, but sincere and really. We didn't strike any trouble going or 
coming, so she didn't need much servicing. We saw system after system 
conquered, world after world laid waste. " 

"On paper, we should," Belle said, thoughtfully. "You said something about her 
mother, I didn't want to say anything to raise false hopes while she was here, 
but I've got an idea. Unlike you of the Fenachrone, however, men of my race do 
not always kill strangers at sight, merely because they are strangers. The 
operatives proved it and saved it, over and over, over and over again; by dint 
of what unsparing effort and selfless devotion only they themselves ever fully 
knew. However, I'll not tempt the old lady any farther. Check?" 

"Check. 

"Check. And while you're changing suits you'd better put on some stuff I've got 
here--Service Special phones and detectors. You can relax now--take it easy. 
Chief Pilot Breckenridge and I will not be with you. In some small and partial 
recompense for what they are doing for us all, he and I are going with Captain 
Czuv to Callisto, there to see whether or not we can aid them in any way in the 
fight against the hexans. 

She was performing certain routine tasks--charting meteorites, watching for 
derelicts and other obstructions to navigation, checking in constantly with all 
scheduled space-ships in case of need, and so on--but primarily she was a 
warship. It was plain that she did not quite know whether or not to like the 
nicknames which the rescuers were calling her Conway. " 

He closed the doors to keep out a part of the noise and advanced the speed 
lever a little, so that the vessel tilted sharply under the pull of the almost 
horizontal bar. "If I helped you hatch out any such brainstorm as _that_, I'm 
going onto Tillinghast's couch for a six-week overhaul--or have him put me into 
his padded cell. " 

"As a crew-chief, you know the law. 

"Arisia," Samms insisted. 

"Daddy, Dick is asleep out there in the chair. "I've had a lot of curiosity to 
know just what kind of unnatural monstrosities can possibly have such fiendish 
dispositions as they've got--but beasts, men or devils, they'll find they've 
grabbed something this time they can't let go of," and fierce blasts of energy 
ripped from the exhausts as he drove his missiles, at their highest possible 
acceleration, toward the captive sphere so savagely struggling at the extremity 
of his tractor beam. . . ninety. . should think they'd _have_ to radiate from a 
center, and so be spherical," Brandon cogitated. "However, we've got nothing 
corkscrewy enough to go through them, so we'll have to stand by. We'll stay 
inside whenever possible, look on from outside when we must, but all the time 
picking up whatever information we can. " 

Soon they arrived at their objective and maintained a position well in the van, 
but not sufficiently far ahead of the rest to call forth a restraining ray from 
their captors. . . . " 

"Why not? I'm for direct action, first, last and all the time. " To the 
surprise of both Terrestrials, Czuv was speaking English, but with a strong and 
very peculiar accent; slighting all the vowels and accenting heavily the 
consonant sounds. Crane threw open the door and Seaton joined the others. 

She told him her story, frankly and fully, shuddering with horror as she 
recalled the awful, helpless fall, during which Perkins had met his end. Dead 
black as were all the warplanes, its body was twice as large as that of the 
ordinary vessel, its wings were even more stubby, and its accommodations had 
been cut to a minimum to make room for the enormous stores of fuel necessary to 
drive the greatly increased battery of rocket motors and for the extra supply 
of torpedoes carried. Christ, what a mess! But there's six-seven good glasses 
in there. I'd grab one myself, but the general would see it--he can see right 
through the lid of a mess-kit. There was no light, no noise, but the massive 
portal swung smoothly open. He was too busy, had too many worthwhile things to 
do, to waste time that way. What then? The essence that was Gharlane could not 
be killed--could not even be hurt--by any physical, chemical, or nuclear force. 
As I said before, I'm with you from now on, in whatever you think best to do. 
My guess is that it'll take another ten thousand years of preliminary surveying 
such as we're doing, by all the crews the various Galaxian Societies can put 
out, before even the roughest kind of an estimate can be made as to how many 
planets are inhabited by mutually fertile human peoples. There are _so_ many of 
us! If they had killed me another slugger would have taken my place and the 
effect upon the job would have been nil. Each Kedy element was the sole 
personnel of, and was integral with, his vessel. " 

"I see. You _talk_ a good game of urbanity, but your brand of it would never 
carry you _that_ far. But in the meantime, there is tremendous pressure for 
increased production. " 

"I will not invite it, sir, now that I've got a job to do. "My guess is it'd 
take four months to design and build a generator to put out that kind of stuff. 
" 

Thus nothing happened; thus the invisible but nevertheless terrific tension did 
not erupt into open battle; and thus, for the first time in North America's 
long history, a presidential election was ninety nine and ninety nine 
one-hundredths percent pure! 

Evening came. "Talk about _power!_ And _speed!_ To get all that stuff and 'port 
up here in the millisecond or so we had the screens open? Baby Doll, there's a 
guy who is what a Prime Operator _ought_ to be!" 

In less than a minute the man reappeared, accompanied by a woman who was very 
obviously pregnant--eight months or so. " 

"By no means. "You cannot be sure that your Intelligence has located all of the 
danger points, and many of them must be so far underground as to be safe from 
even our heaviest missiles. That kind of thing went out quite a while ago, you 
know. Following me?" 

"Right behind you," she assured him. She had been listening intently, her 
wide-spaced brown eyes fastened upon his face. What could he have _possibly_ 
done to put Teddy Blake, of all people, onto such a warpath as this? 

"I've been wondering when you were going to try to put _me_ through your 
wringer," she went on, in the same cold, hard voice, "and I've been waiting to 
tell you something. " 

"I see. Well, if it comes to that, I can do the same. We'll need it for what's 
coming, and I'm going to get it, if I have to kill him to do it. That gives us 
a coversed sine in 30, and then we integrate. " 

"And the Masters had to work in the creche whenever anything really new had to 
be put into the prototype brain. "You see, I've never. How? With whom? By what 
stretch of the imagination do you figure that you can find anybody with a loose 
enough mouth to out-lie and out-promise Morgan? And can you duplicate his 
machine?" 

"We can not only duplicate his machine; we can better it. The truth, presented 
to the people in language they can understand and appreciate, by a man whom 
they like, admire, and respect, will be more attractive than Morgan's promises. 

The Station was also silent and dark. 

"Better not waste much more time. On rafts, at six or seven miles an hour, 
faster by far than any army can march. " 

"Very much so. "That's high, even for him!" 

"Just a minute, Jack," Jill cautioned. I'll start at the bottom, as far down as 
you say. I'm quite. You're probably a bit limberer--not too much--but I've 
forgotten more judo than you ever will know. " 

"Thanks, Jarve. "Do you think you can do anything?" 

"Absolutely. When this tapestry wall is finished, it will not be simply form 
and color, as it is now. We keep also this, your half of the Fuel World, in 
trust for you. Also, we have oxygen-generating apparatus aboard, in case we 
should run short. " 

When they towed the two vessels far out into space, Loring put into practise 
the instruction he had received from DuQuesne concerning the complex armament 
of their vessel. "Without your Lens, _anything_ can happen to you. " 

"You are both wrong," said Vaneman. "To the mature mind there is no such thing 
as status. So how about this? We'll dash out to the third dock--just so I won't 
have to actually lie about looking for him--and dash right back here. It is my 
own personal responsibility. A multitude of red dots moved slowly--a hundred 
miles upon that map was a small distance--northward over Canada; a 
closer-packed, less numerous group of yellowish-greens, already on the American 
side of the Pole, was coming south. I wanted to tell you that I have just 
received grave news, which makes it impossible for us to help you immediately, 
as I promised. What is it, anyway?" 

"It is not matter at all, in the ordinary sense of the word. Frank would be the 
one to ask. My hunch is, though, that we're going to be nudists whether we want 
to or not. . I certainly don't do it intentionally. " 

"You do? Why? Since when has it been against the law to have a personal god? 
Most families of Lomarr have them. If we meet anybody it'll mean a battle. 
Shoot. Have the muckers clear the drift, just enough to get through. We must 
hide behind these small ledges until it goes away," answered Crane, his eyes 
upon Margaret's colorless face. And you must not fight with him, 
either"--noting that Seaton's powerful hands had doubled into fists, the 
knuckles showing white through the tanned skin--"though that would be a fight 
worth watching and I would like to see you give him the beating of his life. . 
. . " 

"Perpetual motion--ridiculous!" snapped from the sending disk upon the helmet 
of the master of mechanism. " 

"I'd say so, yes. "Faster. We may need it. Knowing the dimensions of this, our 
galaxy, you can readily understand the exact degree of precision required to 
hold upon a point at its outermost edge. There ensued an explosion veritably 
space-racking in its intensity; a flash of incandescent brilliance that seemed 
to fill all space, subsiding into a vast volume of tenuous gas which, feebly 
glowing, flowed about and attached itself to Cantrell's Comet. 

And George Olmstead, sighing wearily and yet blissfully anticipatory of one 
more day of enthralling sport, gathered up his equipment and his fish and 
strolled toward the hotel. 

He had come down in his gig, to confer with Hilton as to the newly beefed-up 
fleet. Way after unworkable, useless way. Now, Olmstead, watch. Distance does 
not exist--every point in the reachable universe coincides with every other 
point and that common point is the focus of your attention. You can be and 
actually are anywhere you please or everywhere at once. We'll polish off. Then 
the other fellow will revive and cut his off, for an observation. Three days 
later, all the mechs went back to work. Lord of the ancients! Was this lifetime 
of agony only one minute? Or wasn't he holding her--had the damn thing stopped 
cutting? No, it was still cutting--the rocks were banging against and bouncing 
off of his helmet as viciously and as numerously as ever; he could sense, 
rather than feel, the furious fashion in which the relays of timbermen were 
laboring to keep those high-stepping jacks in motion. " 

"At earliest dawn take two centuries of axemen and one century of bowmen, with 
the wagonload of wood-workers' supplies about which some of you have wondered. 
"It doesn't look _exactly_ like a spray-on job; but if you ever take a deep 
breath it'll split from here to there. " 

"Nerve? You?" James asked, incredulously. I know Dick Seaton better than you 
do--better than he knows himself. . " 

"You have not. Almost immediately he released the zone, pointed the bar 
parallel to the compass bearing upon Osnome, and slowly applied the power. For 
little Sammy had taken the entire feminine contingent by storm. Rodebush cut 
off his power, and through the crackling roar of tube noise an almost inaudible 
voice made itself heard. 

". 

"Check. " 

"Theorize, then!" 

"Postulate that the Masters, in many thousands of cycles of study, made 
advances in science that were not reduced to practice; that the Omans either 
possessed this knowledge or had access to it; and that Omans and humans 
cooperated fully in sharing and in working with all the knowledges thus 
available. " Beverly Bell held up her right hand, which was shaking 
uncontrollably. I can't name it, either--maybe you had better call Genealogy 
some day and find out. That failure is not too surprising, of course, since my 
mind is weak and my total power is small. " 

"Oh, blast! I didn't mean that, and you know it!" 

They were at the car. "That was exactly the tone to take with him, too--you've 
sure got him guessing!" 

"It seemed to get him, all right, but I'm wondering how long it'll hold him. 
Think on. If brute force is your only logic, know now that I can, and will, use 
brute force. If he refused to answer, you would know why and could initiate 
impeachment proceedings then and there. Steve can talk to him for me--see you 
later," and Brandon was gone. 

He went directly to the Vorkulian fortress, bare now of hexan life and devoid 
of hexan snares and traps. Hear, then, the message we bring," and again Garlock 
told the story. 

"We thank you, sir and madam, from our hearts. "The earliest life-forms must 
have developed a shield before they could evolve and stabilize. I _still_ don't 
like it. Now, about the ship we want. The Civilization which has been pictured 
as developing peacefully upon all the teeming planets of two galaxies will not 
now of itself come into being. 

"That rise may be open, it goes through solid rock, not waste. Those Black 
bombs should have peeled the armor off of that mountain like the skin off of a 
nectarine and scattered it from the Pacific to the Mississippi. " 

"Then the really civilized races are probably. 

"You'll learn. . . . . . . . . You're right, Jack. One in a million. One only. 
. " 

"The suit is self-decontaminating, Master. I told you she was a potent force--a 
full-scale powerhouse, in sync and on the line. Will you please give me enough 
of your mental pattern, Doctor Garlock, so that I can call you in case of need? 
Thank you. I'll go with you. 

"Hi, Laro. And as the light-years and the parsecs screamed past, he sank deeper 
and deeper into a welter of unproductive speculation. I feel as though I'd done 
a day's work. To stand up under such punishment as you gave it, my dear, 
anything would have to be tattooed in, not just put on. " 

"Unclear, then. "They've got phones at the hospital where we're going, but you 
might faint or something before we get there. " 

Kinnison told, but fought to retain what consciousness he had. . " 

"But fishy!" Cleveland broke in. " He absented himself in thought, then came to 
life with a snap. 









Spacehounds Triumphant 



Now that the hexan threat that had so long oppressed the humanity of the 
_Sirius_ was lifted, that dull gray football of armor steel was filled with 
relief and rejoicing as the pilot laid his course for Europa. " Rodebush 
changed the subject abruptly as they stepped into a vast room, almost filled by 
the immense bulk of the _Boise_--the sinister space-ship which, although never 
flown, had already lined with black so many pages of Triplanetary's roster. " 

"I see. DuQuesne listened, his face impassive. It was no ordinary burglary, 
that is certain from Shiro's story. " 

"I wouldn't doubt it--it's a queer one, all right. That sleep put you on your 
feet again, and I hope you will have sense enough to take care of yourself 
after this. "Two to get from here to atmosphere, four from Atmosphere down to 
the Hill, and three to cool off. There are now six handless men in your 
hospital room. Much traffic and interbreeding followed between the hexans of 
Jupiter and those of Io, resulting in time in a race intermediate in size 
between the parent stocks and equally at home in the widely variant air 
pressures and gravities of planet and satellite. He's been chased so much that 
he's wild. But none of us can get any kind of a raise out of him at all--not 
even Nadia, when she fed him a whole box of chocolates. It forecasts us to get 
just under forty nine percent of the total vote. " 

"The girl? Act your age, Senator. Through the arenak walls they recognized 
Dunark, Kofedix of Kondal, at the controls, and saw Sitar, his beautiful young 
queen, lying in one of the seats near the wall. 



"I greet you, Supreme Grand Marshal Entlore, Highest Commander of the Armed 
Forces of Nargoda. " 

"But you are arguing in circles," Samms protested. "Careful! You'll touch them 
off and they'll. . " 

"Northrop! Jack!" came Virgil Samms' highly concerned thought. " 

"Accumulators!" 

"700,000 kilofrank-hours--all x. "We both know that if I were still in the 
kindergarten I wouldn't be here now. " 

"Well. . 

He glanced at the king, then stared back at the broad, trampled, deep-rutted 
way the army had come. D. in anthropology you'd've thrown it into the converter 
before it even hatched!" 

"Invasion of privacy? That covers it, of course, but I didn't think it would 
bother you a bit. " Lola paused, studying the other girl intently. "You're 
Galactic Admiral; I'm your Vice. I'd trade my immortal soul to the devil if it 
would get you out of this mess, but we're both in it up to our necks and we 
can't back out now. There was no light, no noise, but the massive portal swung 
smoothly open. There was a machine that buzzed and white-clad men who studied 
films and papers. "You have said that your mind is feeble. We all, including 
you, believe that the Psychologist is right in holding that the reaction of the 
other nations to such action would be both unfavorable and violent. Look at 
that sun flit by!" 



They saw the two planets, one like a small moon, the other like a large star, 
and saw the strange sun increase rapidly in size as the Skylark flew on at such 
a pace that any earthly distance would have been covered as soon as it was 
begun. A Tellurian can admire, respect, or like a Venerian, yes. A sp. 
Acceleration was brought slowly up to normal, and the battle-scarred cruiser of 
the void, with her heavy burden of inert metal, resumed her interrupted voyage 
toward Europa; the satellite upon which the passengers and crew of the 
ill-fated _Arcturus_ had been so long immured. On she bored through the ether, 
detector screens full out and greenly scintillant Vorkulian wall-screens 
outlining her football shape in weird and ghastly light; unafraid now of any 
possible surviving space-craft of the hexans. They would have to come after 
him, and as he retreated, they would be fighting their way up, and not more 
than two at a time. No survivors have been found, no bodies have been 
recovered. 

"Here are your pellets, General Cardeen. . . " 

"Clam it yourself, Steve! Don't believe a word of it, Dad and Bill. Through 
massive double doors into a room, whose most conspicuous item of furniture was 
a heavy steel chair, bolted to the floor. 



"I greet you, Supreme Grand Marshal Entlore, Highest Commander of the Armed 
Forces of Nargoda. 

"You see, I am perfectly safe from being 'shot,' as you call it," Lola said. 
"Well, I've never been a proponent of genocide. If you, with your vaunted and 
flaunted belief in the inherent superiority of the female over the male, can 
dope out something useful before I do, I'll eat crow and help you do it. Work 
with each other and me and we all may live--fight on and both your nations, to 
the last person, will most certainly die. " 

They knew. "We just came along. Just to keep the boys company. Why?" 

"Because there's something going on out there that neither we nor apparently 
the pirates know anything about. I can navigate anything, and Breckenridge can 
observe as well as any of your own men. . . . der. . " 

"Hold, fool! Your thought is completely disloyal and un-Strettly. In fact, from 
a study of the charts of the last few weeks, I'm pretty sure that E2 is at 
least four thousand kilometers this side of where he thinks he is, that W41 is 
ten or twelve thousand beyond his station, and that they've both got a lateral 
displacement that's simply fierce. Garby and I decided, after some discussion, 
to allow two mathematical impossibilities to stand. One of these immediately 
became the target of critics from Maine to California and, while no astronomer 
has as yet called attention to the other, I would not be surprised to hear 
about it, even at this late date. "Just in case you get scragged in one of 
these brawls and I don't?" 

"Oh! Of course! Forgive me, Fry--it slipped my mind completely that you didn't 
know where it was. How technical can you stand it?" 

"I can go down with you middling deep--I took a lot of general science, and 
physics through advanced mechanics. He's got only half of the constants down, 
and half of the ones he has got down are wrong. " 

"But you--how can you do it?" Celeste marveled. So scat, all of you, and get 
back to work--except Sandy, Bill, Alex, and Teddy. On one hand, I have had real 
hunches all my life. Even in such scenes of violence as that which had occurred 
at the Ambassadors' Ball he managed to remain unnoticed. " 

"Probably. 

"You tell him, Peggy--we both feel the same way. They started early enough, 
worked hard enough, and had enough stuff, to earn both. Stevens waved his arms 
vigorously at the stranger, pointing backward toward where he supposed their 
own craft to be. And upon days when the beautiful brunette did not appear, the 
commandant generally found it necessary to inspect in person something in the 
_Arcturus_. I've got a couple of ideas, but they aren't ripe enough to pick 
yet. " 

"I can't wait. "The Grand Rally is going to be held three weeks before election 
day. " 

". . " 

The half-uttered message was drowned out in a crackling roar of meaningless 
noise, the orderly signals of the bell became a hideous clamor, and the two 
points of light which had marked the location of the liner disappeared in 
widely spreading flashes of the same high-powered interference. "She's lost all 
her spherical strength--anchoring a tractor with this ship now would turn her 
inside out. " 

As Perkins threw one end of a small rope around her ankles Dorothy doubled up 
her knees, drawing her feet as far away from him as possible. 

For a time the terrific rocket motors continued the deafening roar of their 
continuous explosions, then, the desired velocity having been attained, they 
were cut out and for hours the good ship "Bzark" hurtled on through the void at 
an enormous but constant speed toward the distant world of One, which it was 
destined never to reach. Instead, foggily, he tried to look back at the crater. 
Blast 'em down!" 

He gritted his teeth. The scouts and light cruisers were doing their damndest, 
but they were out-numbered three to one--Christ, what a lot of stuff was 
getting through! The Blacks wouldn't last long, between the Hill and the 
heavies. 

Beverly was almost in collapse. On the contrary, he had made inconspicuousness 
a passion and an art. On the other, the signal doesn't carry much information. 
. " Hilton gulped twice. He shut it off and turned to his fellows with a 
grin--a grin which disappeared instantly as a thought struck him and he leaped 
back to his board. The only possible way in which any of his subordinates could 
get in touch with him was by means of the wonderful wireless telephone already 
referred to, developed by a drug-crazed genius who had died shortly after it 
was perfected. 

Capital ships and a few of the heaviest cruisers could mount screen generators 
able to carry that frightful load; but every smaller ship caught in that 
semi-solid rod of indescribably incandescent fury simply flared into 
nothingness. Believe me, girl, there'll be junk filling all the space between 
here and Saturn when we touch them off!" 

"Wonderful, Steve!" Nadia exclaimed. We'd be sunk right. But just to be on the 
safe side, maybe I'd better camp here at the board, and you bring me over 
something to eat. Reflect, please, upon the completeness of your failure in the 
affair of Roger's planetoid; upon the fact that you have accomplished nothing 
whatever since that time; upon the situation in which you now find yourself. 

"Even though the trend of thought of your race is basically materialistic and 
mechanistic, and you belittle ours as being 'philosophic' and 'impractical', 
you found--much to your surprise--that your most destructive physical agencies 
are not able to affect even this form of flesh which I am now energizing, to 
say nothing of affecting the reality which is I. This bathroom, however, is 
practical only when we have some force downward, either gravitation or our own 
acceleration. But you know that I love you just the same, even though I do 
appear to neglect you," he continued with fierce intensity. 

"I shall be an interstellar diplomat," Dorothy whispered to Seaton as soon as 
they were alone. He could also plainly see a deeply-cushioned chair, designed 
to fit a human body, welded to a stanchion and equipped with half a dozen 
padded restraining straps. He gasped when he saw the bones and perceived three 
of Nadia's arrows, but soon saw that the skeleton was not human and was 
reassured. Nalboon nodded his comprehension and going outside, pointed upward 
toward the largest of the eleven suns visible, motioning its rising and 
setting, four times. The case flew open and Seaton, taking a cigarette, 
extended the case. Eagerly the three men studied the craft, which ranged in 
size from one-man helicopters, little more than single chairs flying about in 
the air, up to tremendous multiplane freighters, capable of carrying thousands 
of tons. 

Flying high over the city to avoid its congested air-lanes, the fleet descended 
toward an immense building just outside the city proper, and all landed upon 
its roof save the flagship, which led the Skylark to a landing-dock nearby--a 
massive pile of metal and stone, upon which Nalboon and his retinue stood to 
welcome the guests. You were. This lifeboat will hold heat for quite a while, 
and I'd rather get pretty cold than meet any more of that gang. Second, I run 
out of blasters. 

During the ensuing pause, Garlock cut the President and Chief of Staff out of 
the linkage. But the few remaining thousands had almost reached their sublime 
goal. " 

"Be logical, fool! At that contact, in the matter of which you erred in not 
following up continuously, they succeeded in concealing their real abilities 
from you. I'll remember that. And since this is more or less new stuff to you, 
I'll caution you--don't try to touch anything that has just come in. " 

"I'll do that. " Patroclus shrugged his massive shoulders. " 

"How about wearing some kind of half-way-comfortable shoes instead of those 
slippers?" Garlock asked. 'Bye, Clee. " She turned to the left. " Samms 
interrupted. Instantly he was a-sprawl, the effort necessary to carry his 
weight upon the Earth's surface lifting him into the air in a succession of 
ludicrous hops, but he soon recovered himself and walked normally. An intense, 
livid violet glow hid completely main and auxiliary power bars, and long 
flashes leaped between metallic objects in all parts of the vessel. When even 
the hyper-critical Westfall was convinced that their preparations were as 
complete as they could be made with the limited information at hand, Brandon 
directed a beam upon the satellite and tapped off a brief message: 

"stevens ganymede will arrive in about ten hours direct carrier beam toward sun 
we can detect it and will follow it to wherever you are sirius. You may not 
know that you know it, but you do. " 

"Huh?" Kinnison gasped as though he had received a blow in the solar plexus. 
"You know what that bleached-blonde tried to do? High-hat _me!_" 

"I noticed. The ether will be clear for you along route 
E2-P6-W41-K3-R19-S7-M14. This one represents the best features of all the 
systems tried. It must be abated. The city was built close to deposits of coal, 
oil, and gas of sufficient amount to support our life for thousands of years; 
for from these deposits come power, food, clothing, and all the other 
necessities and luxuries of our lives. This astonishment of the stranger at a 
simple sleight-of-hand feat and his apparent ignorance of tobacco emboldened 
Seaton. In the meantime we'll get ready. 

"And now the real job begins," Garlock said, as James dropped the starship down 
to within a few miles of the moon's surface. Not until he felt a finger 
exploring the short hair at the back of his neck did he realize what she was 
seeking--the almost imperceptible scar marking the place where she bit him when 
she was seven years old! 

"Oh, Fry! It _is_ you! _Really_ you! Thank the gods! I've been ashamed of that 
all my life, but now. And the baffled Nationalists, trying to play the whole 
thing down, made matters worse. 

Decision instantly made, Costigan ran back toward the speedster, but he was not 
deserting his companions. " Samms smiled disarmingly. The Mayfield was running. 
Who? Deggi and Fao? They're cooperative and idealistic enough, but. . " 

"Slavery, you mean!" Samms stormed. "But can't the damned stuff be controlled? 
Choked--throttled down--damped--muzzled, some way or other?" 

"We do not know of any way, sir. You don't know, apparently, that the Ozobe 
bases are on the far side of your moon. Petrine?" 

"Not 'practically', we are Petrinos all. The 'teachers' were all in the Center. 

Into an elevator and straight down for what must have been four or five hundred 
feet. Men, stamping their feet and waving their arms, yelled and swore. And 
many, men and women alike, laid wagers. Now, Uncle Andy, I want the _truth_. . 
. . . . . . . . I have never been balked for long. " 

"A balanced thought," the Rigellian approved. We can almost draw an 
organization chart now. " 

"I can tell you about it, but I wouldn't want to tell many people. " 

"Good for him!" exclaimed Dorothy. She isn't--hasn't been. 

"Frank! Oh, Frank!" she called. "Leave it on until the last poss. . . . . . . . 
. excuse my ignorance, please!" Garlock implored, as he picked the girl up, 
carried her across the room to a sofa, and assured himself that she had not 
been really hurt. . . " 

She paused. "Vee-Two Gas! Get tight!" 

Writhing and twisting in his fierce struggle to keep his lungs from gulping in 
a draft of that noxious atmosphere, and with the unconscious form of the girl 
draped limply over his left arm, Costigan leaped toward the portal of the 
nearest lifeboat. Orchestra instruments crashed to the floor and dancing 
couples fell and sprawled inertly while the tortured First Officer swung the 
door of the lifeboat open and dashed across the tiny room to the air-valves. 
Throwing them wide open, he put his mouth to the orifice and let his laboring 
lungs gasp their eager fill of the cold blast roaring from the tanks. The glare 
of the searchlight was snuffed out and he saw a flashing light spell out in 
dots and dashes: 

"Can you read Morse?" 

"Yes," he signalled back. We'll have them in three days, and it ought to be 
fairly simple to dope out the opposite of a tractor, too--a pusher or presser 
beam. " 

And in the control room, Kedo's voice rasped into the captain's microphone. 
Therefore we can not and will not meddle again. Volunteers step one pace 
forward. " 

The six stepped forward as one man, and a smile came over the worn face of 
their leader as he watched them draw lots for the privilege of accompanying him 
to probable death. Until our scientists have checked this menace, until we have 
every wearer of that cursed Lens behind steel bars, I advise you in all 
earnestness not to listen to them at all. As soon as you really understand it, 
you'll do something about it yourself, without being told. 

"I know from your message, Dunark, that our guests are from a distant solar 
system, and I can understand your accident with the educator, but I cannot 
understand the titles of these men. 

And finally, without even taking off her clothes, she cried herself to sleep. 
"I'm afraid, Steve. How do you feel after all this excitement, Dottie? Up to 
standard?" 

"I'm scared purple," she replied, nestling against him, "or, at least, if not 
exactly scared, I'm apprehensive and nervous. No notice. No empty one, 
returning toward the moon, reached there. To say nothing of a space officer on 
duty. " 

"Of course. Let's see. Say the Masters didn't come from Terra, but from some 
other planet. Grand Marshal Holson and ComOff Flurnoy, stay here and tune in. . 
. . . . . . . Oh, that's it. Primes. I appreciate that, Clee. Soon they were 
out in open space, hurtling toward the sun under the drive of every possible 
watt of power, and Costigan took off his armor and turned toward the helpless 
body of the captain. 

"Stand up!" he snapped. "Our humans are about to destroy themselves with 
fission and fusion bombs. They send missiles, without warning, against 
visitors. Upward now at the highest permissible velocity the speedster leaped, 
and past the few ships remaining above her she dodged; nothing now between her 
and the freedom of boundless space. 

"You did it, Conway; you did it!" Clio exulted. You do not perceive yours, 
either, as you drive?" This was the first bond to be established between two of 
the most highly advanced races of the First Galaxy! 

The frightful drive continued; the noise grew worse and worse. You know that I 
love you and you know how I love you--with the real love that a man can feel 
for only one woman and only once in his life; and you know exactly what we're 
up against. You'd've thought he was talking to the prize boob of a class of 
half-wits. As long as nobody on the planet knew that there was any such thing 
as space-travel, or suspected that they were not the only form of intelligent 
life in the universe, it was all right. After the flaming arc had done its work 
he turned and handed the paper to a tall man, dressed in plain gray leather, 
who had been watching him with quiet, understanding eyes. 

"Jim," he said, sharply, "have you been consciously aware of Belle's 
manipulation?" 

"Why, no, of course not. "Less than three pounds to the square inch. I wonder 
how he does it?" 

"It doesn't look as though we are ever going to find out--he's sure a 
bear-cat!" replied Seaton, as the karlon, unable to ascend further, dropped in 
a slanting dive toward the lowlands of Kondal--the terrible, swampy region 
covered with poisonous vegetation and inhabited by frightful animals and even 
more frightful savages. " 

"Sure you will. Nobody can. Lots of theories--enzymes, blood sugar, endocrine 
balance, what have you--but no proof. I'll be along later. Good bye. His office 
was on the seventieth floor; the garage occupied level after level of 
sub-basement. 

After a brief farewell Cloud made his way to an elevator and was whisked down 
to the garage. " Brandon did not even turn his heavily-goggled eyes from the 
blazing blankness of his own screen. Whatever they were, they had hands and 
brains. Just _look_ at those shops and machines!" 

"What do we do, boss?" James asked. Going to see if she'll read. Want to take a 
look?" 

He placed the compass upon the plane table, so that its final bearing could be 
read upon the master circles controlled by the gyroscopes; then simultaneously 
started his stop-watch and pressed the button which caused a minute couple to 
be applied to the needle. " 

As they were going out to the landing field Shiro called to them and they 
turned back to the house, learning that Dorothy and her father had just 
arrived. "This situation is apt to get altogether too serious to overlook any 
bets. I told you about Stevens. Hast a bag?" 

"Yea. " 

The flabbergasted and rapidly-deflating king tried to think of some answer to 
this devastating blast, but couldn't. And everybody--even the 
"crackpots"--breathed more easily. 

As the rapidly-flowing golop struck water, the water shivered, came to a 
weirdly unforgettable cold boil, and exploded into drops and streamers and 
jagged-edged chunks of something that was neither water nor land; or rock or 
soil or sand or Satan's unholy brew. Then, so rapidly that it seemed as though 
there must be at least two arrows in the air at once, arrow crashed on arrow; 
wood snapping as iron head struck feathered shaft. 

"If I had a brain in my head, instead of the pint of bean soup I've got up 
there, we'd have worn these when they cut up the _Arcturus_, and saved us a lot 
of mental wear and tear," he remarked. She has extremely high ideals and she's 
a virgin; never really aroused. Triple play, you might say--Clander to Morgan 
to le Bay. " 

"Nice. 

"Now for our armor!" he cried. "Can they match that or not?" 

"You weren't--and I don't believe they can. And I'd better be getting at it 
anyway. " Stevens fell silent, brow wrinkled in thought. No honor that ever 
existed among thieves, or even among free-lances of diplomacy, could stand that 
strain. As far as the enemy knew, the Patrol had no suspicion whatever that 
anything out of the ordinary was going on. Teddy in turn called in Becky and de 
Vaux; Karns wanted Poynter and Beverly; Poynter wanted Braden and the twins; 
and so on. " 

"You aren't the type to leak or name names--oh, I see. The leg broke with a 
pistol-sharp report and Doris leaped backward in surprise. After this fact had 
been explained, Dorothy turned to Margaret. 

He found the Palainian system easily enough, and Palain Seven. But when he 
approached the sacred precincts of the captain's own and inviolate room, he was 
stopped in no uncertain fashion by no less a personage than the Officer of the 
Day. Under the protection of Steel he flourished, and in return for that 
protection he performed, quietly and with neatness and despatch, such odd jobs 
as were in his line, with which he was commissioned. 

When they were seated at an excellent breakfast of ham and eggs, buttered 
toast, and strong, aromatic coffee, DuQuesne broke the long silence. By power 
of mind alone they watched the lenticular aggregation of stars which was much 
later to be known to Tellurian astronomers as Lundmark's Nebula approach their 
own galaxy. They observed attentively and minutely and with high elation the 
occurrence of mathematical impossibility; for the chance of two galaxies ever 
meeting in direct, central, equatorial-plane impact and of passing completely 
through each other is an infinitesimal of such a high order as to be, even 
mathematically, practically indistinguishable from zero. The ship must have 
been disintegrated as soon as Rodebush released his forces. 

Samms had known--in general--what to expect. " Brandon ran an expert hand over 
Stevens' arm and shoulder. "You make me feel ashamed, Martin. " 

"I don't think so. Garlock collected four more men and studied them. Hot up the 
tri-di and the recorder, Toots. I think we ought to have some fun for a change 
and that'll be a lot. " He got up and started purposefully toward her, but both 
non-combatants came between. All I know is that Dick wants to build a heavy 
steel hull, and he is going to put something inside it that will take us out 
into space. 

"Hold everything for a while, Jim," he said, when everyone had eaten. On hands 
and knees on the floor, head to head with Sammy Small between them, they were 
growling deep-throated at each other and nuzzling at the baby, who was having 
the time of his young life. More like hearing a siren when you're driving along 
a street. 

"Begin, Lord Tedric," said the king. The trouble is, I haven't. Battle cruisers 
of the Patrol were powerful vessels, both on offense and defense, and it was a 
known and recognized fact that the men of the Patrol were _men_. A man fighting 
against a god was licked before he started, and knew it. " 

"I say give it to him. "I have only one new fact of any importance; the name of 
one of the higher-ups and its corollary implication that there may be some 
degree of cooperation between Norheim and Uighar. . . well, nothing at all 
serious. . " 

The whistle blew. They had found--and that finding, so baldly put, could have 
filled and should fill a book--that Spaceways' uranium vessels were, beyond any 
reasonable doubt, hauling thionite from Eridan to the planets of Sol. If the 
Patrol losses could be held to eight double rings of ships at the first pass 
and four at the second--theoretical computations indicated losses of six and 
two--Samms and his fellows would be well content. 

"I thank you, everyone who has listened, for your interest. Thanks for being 
such a nice pressure-relief valve. Good night. I brought along all the air I 
could get hold of, but as I told you back there, if we had to depend on it 
altogether, we might be out of luck. " 

The girl flinched and shrank back involuntarily, but forced herself to approach 
that awful head. 

"Well, my skeptical and pessimistic friend, was I lying, or not?" Kinnison 
asked, as soon as the speedster's ports were sealed. "All that Stevens wants is 
some cigarettes, and your daughter's needs, while somewhat more numerous than 
his, seem to be only clothes, powder, perfume, and candy. We like it that way, 
and Osnome gives us the pip. We are the biggest corporation in existence now, 
as you know, and we are still growing--fast. " 

"Heavens, Steve! Are you planning on telegraphing steadily for days at a time?" 

"Sure, but not by hand, of course--I'll have an automatic sender and automatic 
pointers. 

"Dorothy sweetheart, I know exactly how you feel. Through the lower, denser 
layers of atmosphere the _Chicago_ bored in seconds; then, as the air grew 
thinner and thinner, she rushed upward faster and faster. 

"What do you think you've got--what you want?" 

"I don't know. "We are about to pass within a few light-minutes of an 
uninhabited solar system. " 

"No, you cannot shoot him," said Crane, thoughtfully, "and neither can I, worse 
luck. A few minutes sufficed to cover Triplanetary's history and the beginning 
of the Solarian Patrol; then, for almost three hours, he went into the 
ramifications of the Galactic Patrol of his imaginings. High into the air 
extended the upper half of the ship of space--a sullen gray expanse of 
fifty-inch hardened steel armor, curving smoothly upward to a needle prow. Not 
a cloud was to be seen in that flaming sky, and through that dustless 
atmosphere the eye could see the horizon--a horizon three times as distant as 
the one to which we are accustomed--with a distinctness and clarity impossible 
in our Terra's dust-filled air. 

They hastily climbed into the vessel, and Seaton assured himself that the 
controls were uninjured. 



Facing the party from Earth, the Karfedix stood in the ruins of his magnificent 
palace. So long, folks, I'm going up to the shop. I'll clear the table. Then 
the first officer made another and longer trip, returning with a complete suit 
of Triplanetary space armor, exactly like those worn by the two men, but 
considerably smaller. While we are loading, I should like to begin remodeling 
our instruments; to make them something like these; with Dunark's permission. 
Is that explanation clear?" 

"It's clear enough as far as it goes, but what do they look like to 
themselves?" 

"That's too deep for me--I can't explain it, any better than you can. . . . . 
Oh, I see. 

"Right. 

"Can't talk--read it!" Stevens snapped. "Your ignorance doesn't change the fact 
in any particular. And now to hit the good old sack for an indefinite but very 
long period of time. 

"Think over a couple of things. 

"Don't know yet. 

Tedric bent over, heaved the heavy iron pan containing the offerings up onto 
the platform, and turned. The Earth appeared as a great, softly shining, 
greenish half-moon, with parts of its surface obscured by fleecy wisps of 
cloud, and with its two gleaming ice-caps making of its poles two brilliant 
areas of white. 

"None whatever," came flatly from Cloud. Over and around him the lithe forms 
flashed, while the rest of the young people splashed water impartially over all 
the combatants and cheered them on. Hooking the fragment toward him, he thrust 
savagely with his weapon and was reassured--that object was not only metal, but 
it was metal so hard that his pike-head of space-tempered alloy steel did not 
make an impression upon its surface. White, trembling, frankly and openly sick, 
the two men stared at each other in half-amazed joy. 

"It worked," Cleveland smiled wanly as he recovered sufficiently to speak, then 
leaped to his feet. " Samms thought for a moment. . . But how about this? 
Suppose we take a fast tour, with you and I taking quick peeks, without the 
peekees ever knowing we've been peeking?" 

"That's using the brain, Belle. 

"No, sir," Radio Center shot back. "Can't be more than a million miles or so, 
and we're almost stopped. Gravitation won't work through it--bars 
won't--nothing will. And dark? _Dark!_ Folks, you ain't never seen no darkness, 
nor heard no silence. That, I think, is one of the finest things I ever heard 
of. In your case, Miss Marsden, I find myself undecided between two courses of 
action; each highly desirable, but unfortunately mutually exclusive. " 

"What makes the difference?" asked Dorothy curiously. A loose vortex--new. The 
door swung to and was locked from the outside. Drifting in space, you know, 
there is no weight, and you can't walk; you must pull yourself around. If you 
tried to take a step you would bounce up and hit the ceiling, and stay there. 
We'll be engaged until then, and our love will be open and sweet. " 

Time passed. "But why shouldn't they have? Service ships never get anything 
until it's been experimented with for years, but pirates and such always get 
the new stuff as soon as it's discovered. No," Samms admitted, wearily. "Here, 
too, apparently, as everywhere, the big cities are choking themselves to death 
with their own traffic. " 

"Yes. " 

"Pooh! Who cares about that? Besides, for a man out of a job. " Stella's 
tawny-brown eyes twinkled. The massive steel members no longer writhed; the 
crushed and tortured timbers were still. " 

"This crippling power-shortage would really be over?" For the first time since 
Sawtelle had known him, Gordon showed that he was not quite solid Navy brass. 

"No comment," he thought at the man; and, to Belle, "She just took a beating. A 
very unfunny laugh. 

"Well--that, as I may have remarked before, is indisputably and conclusively 
that. "Nothing recorded; just to get acquainted. I take it that someone swore 
his life for me and that I should not ask who that friend might be. Get it for 
me. 

"Boskone? Zwilnik?" Jill demanded. "You can't dematerialize us, and you can't 
integrate above ninety-five dimensions to save your neck. Not green in color; 
sort of purplish. 

Plodding slowly along on mighty Dreegor at the king's right, Tedric roused 
himself from a brown study and, gathering his forces visibly, spoke: "Knowst I 
love the Lady Rhoann, sire?" 

"Aye. As soon as he had introduced Samms to the intensely interested listeners 
at the Rally, Roderick Kinnison disappeared. Seaton cut off the motor and wiped 
his forehead. 

"What can you have to say to me?" the general demanded, disregarding the 
invitation. But has it ever occurred to you that that's a hell of a way to 
treat a first-class, highly capable brain? To waste it on second-hand, copycat, 
carbon-copy stuff?" 

"Why, no, Master, it never did. But what I wanted to talk to you about is, 
how'd you like to be Head of the Inspection Division, which would be enlarged 
to include your present Chemical Section?" 

"Huh?" Kinnison demanded, dumbfounded. You're all too. " 

"Why Clee! You're worrying about _me_? You've done altogether too much for me, 
already. "I will, of course, do anything I can. Needs, wants, longings, and 
desires differ from man to man, and I can satisfy practically any of them. Many 
men take delight in the society of young and beautiful women, but there are 
other urges which I have found quite efficient. In the control room, however, 
there was a platoon of elite guards, clustered so closely about the commander 
and his officers that needles could not be used; a group that would have to be 
wiped out by hand. We are very probably the only intelligent life in the 
Universe. 

"What's the matter, Rod?" 

"Plenty!" the big Lensman snapped back. " The commanders did so. " Hilton 
flipped the switch of the recorder. "That tape will never be heard. You're a 
husky brute, I know, but even you couldn't begin to handle them, even if you 
had good going. Midlands--North Central. " 

"What did you do?" 

"Nothing much, at first. On it mount Lord Llosir so firmly that he will stand 
upright forever against whatever may come of wind or storm. You should realize 
that fact when he kills every gangster you send against him. But to continue: 
you accuse me, and all Arisia, of cowardice; an evidently muddy and inept 
thought. Upon the floor of that corridor were strewn Nevians, who had dropped 
in their tracks. And this tremendous condensation of course causes wind. 
"Especially with half a dozen of those other cats watching? Just wait and see, 
boss!" 

Sandra and her two guests came aboard. By the way, Jarve, I've pulled my team 
off of that conversion stuff. 



The globe went on down, through basement and sub-basement, until it reached 
solid, natural ground. " Avengord was still groggy. Have any of you others any 
valid objections to the establishment of our empire here in this space? If so, 
give me your thought now. You'll find a shift-boss, with a crew of nineteen, up 
in Stope Sixty. 

In due time the long, slender body of the rocket-plane came into view, creeping 
"down" upon the space-ship from "above," and Cleveland bade his friends 
goodbye. His hands clenched themselves into fists, the tight-stretched tendons 
standing boldly out. 

The man next in line was much younger than the leader, much less wrought up, 
much more intent. "Didn't get anything through to you, did they?" 

"No, they didn't even realize that I was taking part in the battle, I guess. 
Did they hurt you while they had you down? I was scared to death for a minute. 
I went to a girls' school, and all we had to do in physics was to get the 
credit; we didn't have to learn it. " 

"Nicely put, Deggi. 

"Arisia," Samms insisted. . m. . . . Have no right to ask you to throw yourself 
away, too. " He turned to the three young Lensmen and the girl. But no firing, 
Captain Sawtelle, until I give the order. " 

"Whatever _that_ is," Jack put in, and even Samms thought a question. Simple. 
And Herkimer Third isn't really a menace; he just thinks he is. 

The story, which had been sent in to the Board the day before on a scrambled 
beam, was one upon which the Ardans had labored for days. That worthy did, with 
longing; to buy it would take six months of a foreman's pay. And Grand Lady 
Lemphi--" He kissed the tips of two fingers and waved them in the air. 

Thus was signed the Triplanetario-Nevian Treaty of Eternal Peace. _They_, my 
friends, never sleep; they have only one God, one tenet, one creed--the 
almighty CREDIT. _That_ is what they are after, and note how craftily, how 
stealthily, they have done and are doing their grabbing. Where is your 
representation upon that so-called Galactic Council? How did this criminal, 
this vicious, this outrageously unconstitutional, this irresponsible, 
uncontrollable, and dictatorial monstrosity come into being? How and when did 
you give this bloated colossus the right to establish its own currency--to have 
the immeasurable effrontery to debar the solidest currency in the universe, the 
credit of North America, from inter-planetary and inter-stellar commerce? Their 
aim is clear; they intend to tax you into slavery and death. " Tedric halted, 
almost in midstride. "Clee, you talk like a man with a paper nose! Who else 
could run the Project? That is," her whole manner changed; "he doesn't know I 
can run it as well as you can--or better--but I could tell him--and maybe you 
think I wouldn't!" 

"You won't have to. Gene, you can start spreading the news that Belle Bellamy 
is a real, honest-to-God Prime Operator in every respect. That she knows more 
about Project Gunther than I do and could run it better. . . but damn it, 
Jarve, I'm holding up the whole procession. . but you just told me that they 
would _never_ produce a Lensman!" 

"That point stopped me, too, at first. " 

"Not 'might', son. " Kinnison's voice was not loud, but it had then a 
peculiarly carrying and immensely authoritative quality. " 

"Oh, no. "Oh, yes, Clee: of course. "The worst is yet to come. But the. By Baal 
and Ishtar, I wish I could feel so! With something to live for at last, I can 
feel my guts turning to water--I can hear Charon's oars. 

This was exactly what Hilton had wanted. It is in no part due to imperialistic 
aims or acts on the part of Atlantis. " 

"And that's where you will go back and back and back, as you said about 
building the penstock?" 

"Back and back is right, if I can find all the necessary raw materials--that's 
what's probably going to put a lot of monkey-wrenches into the machinery. 

"High-handed? Yes," she admitted quite seriously. Mister and Miss are customary 
and sufficient. " 

Behind each row of officers a long davenport appeared; between them a table 
loaded with sandwiches, olives, pickles, relishes, fruits, nuts, soft drinks, 
cigars, and cigarettes. I got to get back myself, don't I? But get one thing 
down solid. " 

"You needn't worry about being paid your price; that's one thing. But if he 
should disappear the stuff would have to come to light, or the Seaton-Crane 
Company might start their power-plant. 

Enphilistor, however, parried the vicious attack without apparent effort. 

He boarded the gigantic ship of war, and with Kinnison pored over those same 
charts. They want to hold us, but I know what to do about that, too," and the 
powerful tractor rods snapped as a plane of pure force knifed through them. " 

". 

"She's a Prime--you wouldn't know anything about it. DuQuesne's voice was cold, 
his black brows were drawn together. 

"Get this, Brookings, and get it straight. The First Cause has willed that you 
should be the instrument through which Kondal is this day made supreme upon 
Osnome. 

In small and partial recognition of that instrumentality, I bestow upon you 
these symbols, which proclaim you our overlord, the ultimate authority of 
Osnome. You, however, have a very clear and solid knowledge of the fundamentals 
of the science, and that is what we need, above all things. " Tuly probed 
mercilessly; so poignantly that each in turn flinched under brand-new and 
almost unbearable pain. 

Down two--left three--down a hair--_Right_! The thing was almost through Zone 
Two; was blasting into Zone One. Wanted to fly a Jenny, but chemists were too 
scarce. (Or were Jennies too valuable?) So they gave me a commission in the 
reserve and loaned me to Herbert Hoover--for the duration, as it turned out. 

In pursuit of my M. He had taken pictures as fast as both officers could 
process the film; he had covered many miles of tape with words only half of 
which either spaceman could understand. 

He then clasped about Crane's wrist a heavily-jeweled, peculiarly-ornamented 
disk wrought of a deep ruby-red metal, supported by a heavy bracelet of the 
same material, the most precious metal of Osnome. Except for the pitted, 
scarred, slagged-down spots which showed so clearly what driving blasts would 
do to such inconceivably cold rock and metal, Palainport was in no way 
distinguishable from any other unimproved portion of the planet's utterly bleak 
surface. Dr. Nels Bergenholm, however, remained. And others. That was why his 
laboratory had been established in the first place. You'll know as well as I do 
what happens next. 

In due time the long, slender body of the rocket-plane came into view, creeping 
"down" upon the space-ship from "above," and Cleveland bade his friends 
goodbye. Are there any other living beings aboard with you?" 

"Excepting micro-organisms, none. "I've wondered, myself, at how I could get 
'em all, but I always do--every time so far. " 

"I'd be glad to," and the _Chicago_ took off. I would be just about as well 
justified in deducing the structure of a range of mountains from a superficial 
study of three pebbles picked up in a creek near them. " 

He hitched the end of his cable around the nugget, made sure that the loops 
would not slip, and then, as Nadia tightened the line, he shoved mightily. "And 
because that figure cannot be improved within the next seven years and because 
of the exceptional weakness of the hexans due to their unexpectedly great 
losses upon Callisto, we are attacking at this time. No, I haven't looked for 
the comet yet, because we'll have to drift for a couple of days before we'll be 
anywhere near where I think it is. I'll take him apart with my bare hands. " 

The surveyor came in. Since we of Earth can not peyondire, we do not expect 
that ability from our computers. They killed all the Masters, they thought, and 
made the planet uninhabitable for any kind of life, even their own. While 
they're coming, your engineers can be building more ships like this one. 

"Now to the matter of the meteor of the Patrol. "That is every scrap of 
metallic copper in the city. Think of it. He swung the communicator beam back 
toward Titan, and Nadia shuddered. 

"I now know what to do," he went on presently. We've got the power question 
licked right now--with these fields we can draw sixty thousand kilofranks from 
cosmic radiation, which is lots more than we'll ever need. But enough of this 
chatter. Besides, anything else would be forbidden. " 

An examination of the plane, which had been moved many feet and almost 
overturned by the force of the explosion, revealed no damage that they could 
not repair on the spot, and dusk saw them speeding through the air toward the 
distant city. " 

"You'd better, since it goes farther than even you suspected. "This world, as 
you have perceived, is Falne. " 

"Oh, not at all, really, sir and lady. 

"Stop it--I'll tell!" she screamed. Let's go!" as he started on a run for the 
testing shed. Um. . . . . . if. 

"Not yet, it isn't!" he snapped. There are fifteen inhabited planets within 
about six light-years of us, and we form a close-knit group. 

The struggle had lasted scarcely ten seconds, coming to its close just as 
Bradley finished blinding and deafening the robot. "Watch that one ahead of 
you, Clio--hold him for a second if you can. Bradley, you and I will take the 
two behind us--now!" 

Costigan stooped and whirled. Seizing a cable-like arm, he pulled the 
outlandish head down, the while the full power of his mighty right leg drove a 
heavy service boot into the place where scaly neck and head joined. The Nevian 
fell, and instantly Costigan leaped at the leader, ahead of the girl. An 
armored hand smote his leg. No matter--Cloud did not solve them laboriously, 
one factor at a time. " This was a statement, not a question. 

This car, however, took off by itself as soon as Samms closed the door. It 
received thoughts and translated them precisely into English. " 

"True, First Lord. 

"In that case the limit would be exactly eight watts. . . you. "And you are not 
afraid of death--now--even subconsciously. " 

"That was perfectly all right, what he did and what they did--what else could 
they have done?" he wanted to know. "The re-pairings would give her two lines 
of attack on me, to be used simultaneously. " 

"But I wouldn't _want_ to keep on living!" Clio declared, with a flash of 
spirit. 

Lensman Dronvire of Rigel Four stood behind him and helped him think. He nosed 
his flyer upward, locked the missile into his sights, and leveled off. 
Furthermore, the job will probably kill him, and even if it doesn't, he will 
never be in a position of trust or where he can learn much of anything. Can 
those ray-screens be made sufficiently powerful to withstand the beam they 
employed last, even for a second?" 

"Hm. " 



"I had a hunch. Dunark knows what's what, but he knows that full dress would be 
unbearable here. Even the guns--heavy rapid-firers, mounted in spherical 
bearings in the walls--were aimed and fired by remote control, from the board. 
The multi-mind weakened suddenly and Hilton snapped it back to Ardry. 

"How about cutting out this checking entirely, Clee?" James asked then. Thank 
God, the field of thought is still free and open. Now, if you'll help me find 
my stuff and bring some of it--a computer and so on--up to the lounge?" They 
did so; the "and so on" proving to be a bewildering miscellany indeed. I know 
damn well that none of you women are wearing guns above the waist, and you've 
all got long skirts--thank God for ballgowns! Now, fellows, if any one of these 
women makes a move to lift her skirt, blow her brains out, right then, without 
waiting to ask questions. 

"Yeah, we're kicking up quite a wake, I guess. Trenco, they call it. " To 
Virgil Samms, the first adherent of Civilization ever to hear it, that name 
meant nothing whatever. 

Deciding that the air was satisfactory, the pressure inside the vessel was 
slowly raised to the value of that outside and two doors were opened, to allow 
the new atmosphere free circulation. There was no passing, no weaving, no 
cutting in and out. They will obey my orders or die. Thus it came about that 
when, upon a scheduled day, the two admirals came to Bennett together, they 
were greeted as enthusiastically as though they had been Bennettans born and 
bred; and their welcome became a planet-wide celebration when Clayton issued 
the orders which all Bennett had been waiting so long and so impatiently to 
hear. It would be an easy matter to have this same mechanism place your meals 
before you wherever you may go upon this planet, provided only that a clear 
path can be plotted from the laboratory to your person. It ate into their bases 
at its own level; the undermined masses, small and large, collapsed into the 
foul, corrosive semi-liquid and were consumed. We ourselves will operate 
through forms of flesh of no higher intelligence than, and indistinguishable 
from, the natives of the planets affected. . . " 

"You'll tell me nothing, Jill--I'm telling _you_! Start giving away points in 
anything and you'll find out some day that you've given away too many. 

"You have to be hard to handle those folks--and believe me, I was a 
forty-minute egg right then. 

Faster and faster the great cruiser shot upward as more and more of the 
starting power was released, and heavier and heavier the passengers felt 
themselves become. In return, I will give you the secrets I have just given the 
Osnomians--the power and the offensive and defensive weapons of this vessel. 
For a brief moment searing lethal beams probed here and there, chains clanked 
and snapped, once more that ponderous and irresistible oaken mace fell like the 
hammer of Thor, again spattering brains and blood abroad as it descended--then 
again came silence. 

"All x, Nadia. Heavy brows and long lashes--eyes too--were all intensely, 
vividly black. . _" 

"_Your visualization is sound, youth. The aftermath. Each pipe was lighted in 
the interior, and each was full of people, heads almost touching feet, 
unconcernedly being borne along, completely immersed in that mad current. 

Physically, it was a scene of almost overpowering perfection. " 

"Trying to beguile a scientist from his hobby is comparable only to luring a 
drug addict away from his vice. . . . . . . . . . . sathura. The brain of the 
Larry is very, very tough. 

"Hey!" Hilton yelped. The pilot reached weakly toward the board, but his leaden 
hands refused utterly to obey the dictates of his reeling mind. The girls, 
instead of wearing the nondescript, non-provocative garments prescribed by the 
Board for their general wear, were all dressed to kill. Your life forces are 
very strong. Even before they went to Osnome, Seaton was hard to get, as you 
found out. At very worst, we will be in the same position then as now to take 
the action which has for a hundred years been specifically forbidden by both 
Council and School. As the last machine subsided into a semi-molten mass of 
metal the two wreckers, each grasping a brace, felt themselves become 
weightless and knew that they had accomplished the first part of their program. 

"Dick," she said fiercely. 

Upon awakening, Stevens' first thought was for the comet, and he observed it 
carefully before he aroused Nadia, who hurried into the control room. Except 
for the pitted, scarred, slagged-down spots which showed so clearly what 
driving blasts would do to such inconceivably cold rock and metal, Palainport 
was in no way distinguishable from any other unimproved portion of the planet's 
utterly bleak surface. "Not without the League for Public Decency sending the 
wagon out after you. And Spaceways owns it, you know, from core to planetary 
limits--the richest uranium mines in existence. I'm me again--I think. But I 
wasn't thinking of any regular Oman brain. Smart operators--quick on the 
uptake. " 

"I'd better get at this, sir, don't you think, and let Operation Boskone go for 
a while?" Costigan asked. "If there's any one thing in the universe I never had 
_you_ figured for, it's a dog in the manger. They'll wreck it and it'll cost 
you. " 

"But Captain Bradley--he'll be gassed, too. " 











Next morning, Garlock was the last one, by a fraction of a minute, into the 
Main. It was four o'clock in the afternoon when they met again. 

It was a very nice office, too. Space was filled with silent, devastating 
tongues of flame. Some were encased in space-suits, and it was to these that 
the rescuers turned first--space-hardened veterans though the men of the 
_Chicago_ were, they did not care even to look at the others. You women, come 
here. However, we've got close to half a ton of the metal on hand--you can have 
all you want. We can learn much in a month if you will really try, instead of 
wasting time in fuming around the ship and indulging in these idiotic tantrums. 
" 

"Okay. "We are civilized men, not barbarians or savages. We know nothing of 
them, since we could not look through their screens. " 

"Two tons! Holy cat! Are you going to plate a fleet of battle cruisers?" 

"More than that. " 

"Getting information out of you is harder than pulling teeth. "You know, as 
well as I do, the findings of the Integrator. That is strange--baffling. And 
one of these bits of furious, uncontrolled energy, resembling more nearly a 
handful of material rived from a sun than anything else with which ordinary man 
is familiar, darted toward and crashed downward to earth through Neal Cloud's 
new house. 

Exactly at the expiration of the stipulated seventy-two hours, the Galaxians 
began to destroy military atomic plants; and, shortly thereafter, the 
starship's crew was again ready to go. "How in. " Hilton grinned. "And even if 
it _was_ so, which it isn't, he can do more work sitting perfectly still than 
any other boss in the whole Works can do tearing around at forty parsecs a 
minute, so there!" 

George Olmstead was earning his salary. Therefore the planet itself must be 
destroyed. " 

Roger thought for minutes, nor did any one of his minions break the silence. 
The other thing I wanted from you is your considered opinion as to my job on 
the organization as a whole. " 

"Huh? Don't be an idiot, Clee. "What to do? Shunt in a potentiometer?" 

"No, we don't need it. 

"Can you come out here, Jarve? We've struck a knot. 

"Perfectly. And as the light-years and the parsecs screamed past, he sank 
deeper and deeper into a welter of unproductive speculation. 

From the city there pushed out immense nets of metal, extending from the 
surface of the ocean to its bottom; nets radiating such terrific forces that 
the very water itself was beaten back and stood motionless in vertical, glassy 
walls. The air was torn by the roars of the reptile, the screams of the great 
cat, and the shrieks of the tree. Finally, when they had to stop for breath: 

"Section B, attached to the 76th Field Artillery," the sergeant answered the 
question as though it had just been asked. 

"Attention!" barked Captain King. It leveled them. More than one observer did 
sicken in fact, and had to be relieved. 



He found himself seated in a narrow canoe of metal, immediately behind the 
pilot, who sat at a small control panel in the bow. Over and around him the 
lithe forms flashed, while the rest of the young people splashed water 
impartially over all the combatants and cheered them on. " 

"_Commander_ Bellamy, indeed! Commander my left foot!" Miss Foster was 
screaming now, in thwarted fury. But say, we've got a lot of power on our 
ultra-wave; enough to reach Tellus, I think. Stevens, jaw hard-set, leaped from 
the screen, then brought himself up so quickly that he skated across the smooth 
steel floor. He checks computations made by astronomers stationed in floating 
observatories, and after he has located any trouble and suggests a plan for 
minimizing the hazards of the trip from the earth to Mars he reports his 
findings and suggestions to Mr. Take all this stuff, for instance; especially 
their ability to transform iron into a fluid allotrope, and in that form to use 
its atomic--nuclear?--energy as power. I am relinquishing command of the 
_Boise_ and the _Chicago_. I get too many and too new ideas at once. But we'd 
better go ahead with it. . 
