I'd better dictate a memorandum to Black on that now, while I'm calm and 
collected; telling him what he'll have to do to keep my boys from tearing 
Entwhistle apart. " 

"But do you think he will pay any attention to it?" 

"I'll say he will!" Kinnison snorted. " With no display whatever of the emotion 
he felt, Samms skipped deliberately to the matter next in hand. "Now, about 
Eridan. P. m. . a thousand. . . . " Her voice died away. 

"That sort of thing is in your department, Dick. " 

"I don't check you, Virge. This whole system, Nevia, the colonies on Aldebaran 
II and other planets, even Valeria, as tight as a drum. Funny about Valeria, 
isn't it. Funny about Valeria, isn't it. Funny about Valeria, isn't it. Funny 
about Valeria, isn't it. Funny about Valeria, isn't it. . well, the word is 
going around that they are going to break you, just as they have broken every 
other good man on the Reservation. " 

"I expected that, too. Good going, Jim!" 

All four ate heartily, and, after eating, they taped up the day's reports. 
Then, tired from their first real day's work in weeks, all went to their rooms. 



A few minutes later, Garlock tapped lightly at Lola's door. 

"Come in. " She stiffened involuntarily, then relaxed and smiled. "What's 
_that_ crack supposed to mean? Think I'd ever accept a synthetic zombie 
imitation of you for my husband and go on living with it just as though nothing 
had happened?" 

Hilton started to say something, but Temple rushed heedlessly on: "_Drat_ the 
race! No matter how many children we ever have you were first and you'll _stay_ 
first, and if you have to go I'll go, too, so there! Besides, you know darn 
well that they can't duplicate whatever it is that makes you Jarvis Hilton. " 

"Now wait a minute, Tempy. The conversion. " 

"Oh?" Hilton raised his eyebrows. He grabbed the out I offered him. I didn't 
fool Teddy Blake or Temple Bells, either. You four are all, though, I think. 
We'll watch over you like a couple of old hens with one chick between them. 
Come on; lie down and go bye-bye. " 

Clio laughed at the simile, but lay down obediently. Costigan sat upon the edge 
of the great divan holding her hand, and they chatted idly. The silences grew 
longer, Clio's remarks became fewer, and soon her long-lashed eyelids fell and 
her deep, regular breathing showed that she was sound asleep. The man stared at 
her, his very heart in his eyes. " 

"Oh, you may have one, but it's no softer than your head, and that could 
scratch a diamond. Second, to work on you two, with no holds barred, to form a 
three-unit team against me. Her charges that I am losing my grip made a very 
smart opening lead. " 

"Do you think I'd _let_ her work on me?" James demanded. 

"She's a Prime--you wouldn't know anything about it. However, nothing will 
happen. We have known how to do it for a hundred years, but have been afraid to 
act because in all that time no progress whatever has been made on the theory. 
"_ 

_He paused, then went on savagely: "But which is better, to have our entire 
time-track snapped painlessly out of existence--if the extremists are right--or 
to sit helplessly on our fat rumps wringing our hands while we watch 
civilization build up to its own total destruction by lithium-tritiide bombs? 
Look at the slope of that curve--ultimate catastrophe is only one hundred 
eighty seven years away!"_ 

"_But the Council would not permit it. Nor would the School. _" 

"_I know that, too. That is why I am not going to ask them. Confidential, sort 
of. . " 

"_Spoils_ it! Why, how _utterly_ idiotic! Why, it's magnificent! Just as soon 
as it starts to show on me, Belle, I'm going to start wearing only half as many 
clothes as I've got on now. " 

"You couldn't. A couple more like that and I'll be a Grand Champion myself. But 
they're digging holes for the crosses and there's the horn that the feast is 
ready. This show is going to be really good. " 

That stopped the levity, cold, but none of the six could really believe it. 
However, after Hilton had coiled a twenty-penny spike into a perfect helix 
between his fingers, and especially after he and Temple had each chewed up and 
swallowed a piece of uranexite, there were no grounds left for doubt. 

"That settles it. The Garlock-Bellamy fusion is Galactic Admiral--so we need a 
good Vice. Who? Deggi and Fao? They're cooperative and idealistic enough, but. 
. . er. . but it's so damned _steady_. " Gharlane's thought was bitter. 
Centuries. " 

"But this is. . twenty. . " 

"To hell with uniforms," Garlock broke in. "Might have helped some as disguise. 
They've got us foul, and can take us if they want us. Anyway, we'll need at 
least a week to fix us up any kind of driving power, so we can't run--and we 
probably couldn't get away from those folks if we had all our power. They 
haven't blown us up, and they could have done it easily enough. I never did 
like him very well personally--he's such a cold, inhuman son of a fish--but 
you've got to hand it to him for ability. He's probably the best man in the 
world today on that kind of thing. " 

"No, I do not think that we will count him out yet. He may have had nothing to 
do with it, but we will have him investigated nevertheless, and will guard 
against future visitors here. Costigan traced it, and there, almost dead ahead 
of them, between them and their sun, nearing them at the incomprehensible rate 
of the sum of the two vessels' velocities, came another cruiser of the Nevians! 

"Must be the sister-ship, coming back from our System with a load of iron," 
Costigan deduced. "Heavily loaded as she is, we may be able to dodge her; and 
she's coming so fast that if we can stay out of her range we'll be all 
right--he won't be able to stop for probably three or four days. But if our 
super-ship is anywhere in these parts, now's the time for her to rally 'round!" 

He gave the speedster all the side-thrust she would take; then, putting every 
available communicator tube behind a tight beam, he aimed it at Sol and began 
sending out a long-continued call to his fellows of the Triplanetary Service. 

Nearer and nearer the Nevian flashed, trying with all her power to intercept 
the speedster; and it soon became evident that, heavily laden though she was, 
she could make enough sideway to bring her within range at the time of meeting. 

"Of course, they've got partial neutralization of inertia, the same as we 
have," Costigan cogitated, "and by the way he's coming I'd say that he had 
orders to blow us out of the ether--he knows as well as we do that he can't 
capture us alive at anything like the relative velocities we've got now. I 
can't give her any more side thrust without overloading the gravity controls, 
so overloaded they've got to be. "To help you get used to it, stop calling me 
'Master'. That's an order. You may call me Jarve or Jarvis or Hilton or 
whatever, but no more Master. I not only didn't want to, I was scared green and 
yellow at just the idea of it. "A few minutes before that. That was when I read 
your name in the list of officers on the board. First Officer, Carlyle Deston. 
I got a tingle that went from the tips of my toes up and out through the very 
ends of my hair. However, I never expected to----" 

"Don't say it, dear!" She got up and took both his hands in hers. "I know how 
you feel. If it gets too strong, we'll beat it. " 

When they had approached so close that the suns were great stars widely spaced 
in the heavens, Crane relinquished the controls to Seaton. 

"If you will take the lever awhile, Dick, Margaret and I will go downstairs and 
see if we can locate a planet. " 

After a glance through the telescope, Crane knew that they were still too far 
from the group of suns to place any planet with certainty, and began taking 
notes. His mind was not upon his work, however, but was completely filled with 
thoughts of the girl at his side. Be careful not to choke on it, though; your 
swallowing will have to be all muscular out here. Gravity won't help you. This 
is certainly Ganymede, and it has a diameter of only about fifty seven hundred 
kilometers. If I remember correctly, Damoiseau estimated its mass at about 
three one-hundredths that of the Earth, which would make its surface gravity 
about one-sixth. However, it is actually almost a half, as you see by this 
spring-balance here. Therefore it is quite a little more massive than has been. 
. . . " Skandos almost said "time," but caught himself ". . you _weasel_! You 
know very well, Clee Garlock, what I meant. If you hadn't given her that 
treatment she'd have kept on fighting with him and they wouldn't have been 
married and had any children for positively _years_. So now she'll have the 
first double-Prime baby and it ought to be _mine_. I'm older than she is--our 
group is 'way ahead of theirs--we have the first and _only_ starship--and then 
you do _that_. And you wouldn't give _me_ that treatment. Oh, no--just to 
_her_, that bleached-blonde! I'd like to strangle you to death with my own bare 
hands!" 

"What a hell of a logic!" Garlock had been trying to keep his own temper in 
leash, but the leash was slipping. "Assume I tried to work on you--assume I 
succeeded--what would you be? What would I have? What age do you think this 
is--that of the Vikings? When SOP in getting a wife was to beat her unconscious 
with a club and drag her into the longboat by her hair? Hardly! I do not want 
and will not have a conquered woman. Nor a spoiled-rotten, mentally-retarded 
brat. . . ?" 

"Dead. Everybody. That's her specialty and she's _very_ good at it. I told you 
she's a smooth, smooth worker. " 

"You can say _that_ again. Henry Newman. Crew-chief, normal space jobs, 
unlimited. " 

"Your passengers, Herc?" 

"Vincent Lopresto, financier, and his two bodyguards. They were sleeping in 
their suits, on air-mattresses. Grounders. Don't like subspace--or space, 
either. " 

"Just so. I would like to stay and study these people a little while, but we 
must get back onto the trail of the Nevians," and the _Boise_ leaped away into 
space, toward the line of flight of the amphibians. 

They reached that line and along it they traveled at full normal blast. As they 
traveled their detecting receivers and amplifiers were reaching out with their 
utmost power; ultra-instruments capable of rendering audible any signal 
originating within many light-years of them, upon any possible communications 
band. And constantly at least two men, with every sense concentrated in their 
ears, were listening to those instruments. 

Listening--straining to distinguish in the deafening roar of background noise 
from the over-driven tubes any sign of voice or of signal: 

Listening--while, millions upon millions of miles beyond even the prodigious 
reach of those ultra-instruments, three human beings were even then sending out 
into empty space an almost hopeless appeal for the help so desperately needed! 









THE SPECIMENS ESCAPE 



Knowing well that conversation with its fellows is one of the greatest needs of 
any intelligent being, the Nevians had permitted the Terrestrial specimens to 
retain possession of their ultra-beam communicators. Thus it was that Costigan 
had been able to keep in touch with his sweetheart and with Bradley. He learned 
that each had been placed upon exhibition in a different Nevian city; that the 
three had been separated in response to an insistent popular demand for such a 
distribution of the peculiar, but highly interesting creatures from a distant 
solar system. They had not been harmed. In fact, each was visited daily by a 
specialist, who made sure that his charge was being kept in the pink of 
condition. 

As soon as he became aware of this condition of things Costigan became morose. 

In short, he was convalescent. 

For Captain Ralph K. Kinnison, THE WAR was over. 









1941 



Chubby, brownette Eunice Kinnison sat in a rocker, reading the Sunday papers 
and listening to her radio. Her husband Ralph lay sprawled upon the davenport, 
smoking a cigarette and reading the current issue of EXTRAORDINARY STORIES 
against an unheard background of music. Mentally, he was far from Tellus, 
flitting in his super-dreadnaught through parsec after parsec of vacuous space. 

The music broke off without warning and there blared out an announcement which 
yanked Ralph Kinnison back to Earth with a violence almost physical. He jumped 
up, jammed his hands into his pockets. 

"Pearl Harbor!" he blurted. "How in. . " Sandra gave up. There wasn't room to 
pace the floor, but Hilton tried to pace it anyway. 

"Now don't say again that you want to _do_ something," Sandra said, brightly. 
"If he makes a pass at her I'll get him if I have to blow this whole sphere out 
of space, with us in it!" 

"Don't do that, Conway," Clio's low voice, trembling but determined, was felt 
by both men. 

"Not yet, it isn't!" he snapped. "There's an answer, but that isn't it. You're 
a fine-tuned instrument yourself, ace, and you've detected something. . " 

"Bunk!" Garlock snorted. "Sheer flapdoodle! Pure psychological prop-wash, 
started and maintained by men who are either too weak to direct and control 
their drives or who haven't any real work to occupy their minds. It applies to 
many men, of course, possibly to most. But what did you start to say about 
Laro?" 

"We think the break is about due, and that if it doesn't come within about 
thirty days it won't come at all--we'll have to back up and start all over 
again. " 

"I hope it does. But it cleared things up no end--it untied a million knots. 
Even that other thing--brotherly love? It's a very nice concept--you see, I 
never had any brothers. " 

"That's probably one thing that was the matter with you. Nothing warmer than 
that, certainly, and never will be. " 

"And I suppose you got the thought--it must have jumped up and smacked you--" 
Lola's hot blush was visible even through her heavy tan, "how many times I've 
felt like running my fingers up and down your ribs and grabbing a handful of 
those terrific muscles of yours, just to see if they're as hard as they look?" 

"I'm glad you brought that up; I don't know whether I would have dared to or 
not. You've got to stop acting like a Third instead of an Operator; and you've 
got to stop acting as though you had never been within ten feet of me. 
I'm--we're both--finding out that Lensman material is _damned_ scarce stuff. 
There's none on Nevia, and no indication whatever that there ever will be any. 
" 

"Tough. . . . . . er. . . " 

Out upon the dock an insistent siren blared a crescendo and diminuendo blast of 
sound, and two minutes remained. In every stateroom and in every lounge and 
saloon speakers sounded a warning: 

"For a short time, while we are pulling clear of the gravitational field of the 
Earth, walking will be somewhat difficult, as everything on board will 
apparently increase in weight by about one-fifth of its present amount. Please 
remain seated, or move about with caution. In about an hour weight will 
gradually return to normal. We start in one minute. I wish they could have had 
that on a recorder--I'll never be able to play like that again if I live to be 
a thousand years old. " 

"It is on record, daughter. Every note and every inflection is preserved, 
precisely as you played it," Orlon assured her. "That is our only excuse for 
allowing you to continue as you did, almost to the point of exhaustion. While 
we cannot really understand an artistic mind of the peculiar type to which 
yours belongs, yet we realized that each time you play you are doing something 
that no one, not even yourself, can ever do again in precisely the same subtle 
fashion. Therefore we allowed, in fact encouraged, you to go on as long as that 
creative impulse should endure--not merely for our pleasure in hearing it, 
great though that pleasure was, but in the hope that our workers in music 
could, by a careful analysis of your product, determine quantitatively the 
exact vibrations or overtones which make the difference between emotional and 
intellectual music. " 









Into a Sun 



As Rovol and Seaton approached the physics laboratory at the beginning of the 
period of labor, another small airboat occupied by one man drew up beside them 
and followed them to the ground. The stranger, another white-bearded ancient, 
greeted Rovol cordially and was introduced to Seaton as "Caslor, the First of 
Mechanism. " 

"Truly, this is a high point in the course of Norlaminian science, my young 
friend," Caslor acknowledged the introduction smilingly. "Those small circles," 
pointing to the forty-foot hour and declination circles which Seaton had 
thought the ultimate in precise measurement of angular magnitudes, "are of 
course useless. "Or are you trying to set up a paradox?" 

"Neither. I am merely clearing the way for a somewhat startling thing I am to 
say later on. You know, of course, that any situation with which a mind is 
unable to cope; a really serious dilemma which it cannot resolve; will destroy 
that mind--frustration, escape from reality, and so on. You also will realize 
that I must have become cognizant of my own peculiarities long before anyone 
else did or could?" 

"Ah. I see. You just don't want _me_ to have him. Okay, do your damnedest. " 

Belle whistled sharply to call Fao's attention, then tight-beamed a thought. 
"If you've got any part of a brain, slick chick, you'd better start using it. 
The boy friend not only plays rough, but he doesn't bluff. " 

"To hell with all that!" Fao rushed on. "We don't have anything to do with your 
organization--go on back home or anywhere else you want to. We'll finish our 
own ship and build our own organization and run it to suit ourselves. We'll. . 
" 

"Thank God for that. "Okay, Sandy, go ahead. " 

Outside the control room door, "Thank God you don't play poker, Jarve!" Karns 
gasped. "We'd all owe you all the pay we'll ever get!" 

"You think it was the bluff, yes?" de Vaux asked. "Me, I think no. Few would 
have the patriotism. . . . . I wonder. " 

The conversation went on, but the rest of it is of little importance here. The 
plane landed. It is written. Selah. " 

"Check. I'm too busy to record, anyway--I'll log this stuff up tonight," and 
thoughts flew. 

"Check me, Jim," Garlock flashed. "Before we move, Belle and I have got to have 
a conference. You have visitors once in a while from other solar systems, so 
you must have a faster-than-light drive. Can you tell me anything about it?" 

"No. Just what they've been advertising. Combination radio-phone, automatic 
language-converter, telepath, and so on. Badge of the top skimmings of the 
top-bracket cops. But I began to think, out there on the floor, that they 
aren't advertising everything they know. " 

"So did I. I still wish they'd given me Eggy. I've never seen an executive-type 
female Ph. D. _ 



_Illustrated by Lawrence_ 

Time is the strangest of all mysteries. Relatively unimportant events, almost 
unnoticed as they occur, may, in hundreds of years, result in Ultimate 
Catastrophe. His Lens had never been visible. No one except Lensmen--and Clio 
and Jill--knew that he had one; and Lensmen--and Clio and Jill--did not talk. 
Although he was calmly certain that this Birkenfeld was not an ordinary 
interviewer, he was equally certain that the investigators of Uranium, Inc. had 
found out exactly and only what the Patrol had wanted them to find. 

"So?" Jones' bearing altered subtly, and not because of the penetrant eyes. 
"That's all I want--a chance. I'll start at the bottom, as far down as you say. 
" 

"We advertise, and truthfully, that opportunity on Eridan is unlimited. " 
Birkenfeld chose his words with care. "In your case, opportunity will be either 
absolutely unlimited or zero, depending entirely upon yourself. " 

"I see. But you have suspicions or ideas? You can guess?" 

"I can guess; but that's all it would be--a guess. " 

"And my guess, folks, is that his guess would be a very highly informed guess. 
Will you tell the public, First Lensman Samms, what your guess is?" 

"I will. "_ 

_"What a couple!" Furmin stared enviously. "We don't have people like that any 
more. We know they were around here a few weeks ago, and they're the only ones 
I know of that have intra-atomic power besides us and the Osnomians. We may be 
able to dope out the next one, though. I've found out where he put our armor 
and guns, and I've located all the main leads, controls, and generators. There 
are no ether-walls around us here, but every door is shielded, and there are 
guards outside our doors--one to each of us. They're robots, not men. That 
makes it harder, since they're undoubtedly connected direct to Roger's desk and 
will give an alarm at the first hint of abnormal performance. We can't do a 
thing until he leaves his desk. It has seemed, right along, more logical than 
the girl--but a lot more fantastic. Been able to find out anything more about 
it?" 

"No. " 

"Got a compass?" 

"Yes, sir. " 

"Pick up a tin hat and get going. A hair north of due west, about a kilometer 
and a half. Keep cover, because the going will be tough. Then you'll come to a 
road. What had been a road, what had been wheatfields and farms, what had been 
woods, were practically indistinguishable, one from the other; were 
fantastically and impossibly the same. The entire area had been churned. 
Worse--it was as though the ground and its every surface object had been run 
through a gargantuan mill and spewed abroad. Splinters of wood, riven chunks of 
metal, a few scraps of bloody flesh. Kinnison screamed, then, and ran; ran back 
and around that blasted acreage. And as he ran, his mind built up pictures; 
pictures which became only the more vivid because of his frantic efforts to 
wipe them out. 

That road, the night before, had been one of the world's most heavily traveled 
highways. Motorcycles, trucks, bicycles. Ambulances. Kitchens. Staff-cars and 
other automobiles. Guns; from seventy-fives up to the big boys, whose 
tremendous weight drove their wide caterpillar treads inches deep into solid 
ground. Horses. Then, suddenly--Tedric never did know how it happened, since 
Dreegor was later found uninjured--he found himself afoot. No place for sword, 
this, but made to order for axe. Hence, driving forward as resistlessly as 
though a phalanx of iron were behind him, he hewed his way toward his 
sovereign. 

Thus he was near at hand when Phagon went down. So was doughty Sciro; and by 
the time the Sarlonians had learned that sword nor axe nor hammer could cut or 
smash that gold-seeming armor fury personified was upon them. Tedric straddled 
his king's head, Sciro his feet; and, back to back, two of Lomarr's mightiest 
armsmasters wove circular webs of flying steel through which it was sheerest 
suicide to attempt to pass. Thus battle raged until the last armored foeman was 
down. 

"Art hurt, sire?" Tedric asked anxiously as he and Sciro lifted Phagon to his 
feet. 

"Nay, my masters-at-arms," the monarch gasped, still panting for breath. 
"Bruised merely, and somewhat winded. " He opened his visor to let more air in; 
then, as he regained control, he shook off the supporting hands and stood erect 
under his own power. "I fear me, Tedric, that you and that vixen daughter of 
mine were in some sense right. Methinks I may be--Oh, the veriest trifle!--out 
of condition. But the battle is almost over. " 

"With that much start they probably couldn't find us," Seaton replied soberly. 
"It's the world I'm thinking about. _Punch_ it! _This_ time the ship's going to 
_Clamer_, if we have to all get out and _push_ it there! Now punch that 
button!" 

James pushed the button, glanced into his scanner, and froze; eyes staring. He 
did not even whistle. Virgilia Samms, all smiles, toed the base-line and became 
the personification and embodiment of smoothly flowing motion. The ball whizzed 
over the net, barely clearing it--a sizzling service ace. The game went on. 

And a few minutes later, in the shower room, where Jack Kinnison was caroling 
lustily while plying a towel, a huge young man strode up and slapped him 
ringingly between the shoulder blades. 

"Congratulations, Jack, and so forth. But there's a thing I want to ask you. 
Confidential, sort of. . . " 

"I'll tell the cockeyed world you won't!" Hilton broke in. "Me marry a damned 
female Ph. Next time I go to school I'm going to Yale or Harvard or some such 
place, and I'll learn so much mathematics and science that I'll have to wear a 
bandeau to keep my massive intellect in place. " 

During this conversation they had prepared a substantial luncheon and had 
arranged it daintily upon two large trays, in spite of the difficulty caused by 
the fact that nothing would remain in place by its own weight. The feast 
prepared, Dorothy took her tray from the table as carefully as she could, and 
saw the sandwiches and bottles start to float toward the ceiling. Hastily 
inverting the tray above the escaping viands, she pushed them back down upon 
the table. In doing so she lifted herself clear from the floor, as she had 
forgotten to hold herself down. A dwelling awaits each Master, in which each 
will be served by Omans who will know the Master's desires without being told. 
Every desire. While we Omans have no biological urges, we are of course highly 
skilled in relieving tensions and derive as much pleasure from that service as 
from any other. " 

Sawtelle broke the silence that followed. She sat down on the edge of a chair, 
lighted a cigarette, and began to smoke in short, nervous puffs. She opened her 
mouth to say something, but shut it without making a sound. 

"You're afraid of me, Lola?" he asked, quietly. . I am not at all sure that I 
can explain it to you satisfactorily, but I will try to do so, if you wish. " 

"Please do so, sir, by all means. " 



Garlock opened the highest Gunther cells of his mind. Shall I bomb 'em out?" 

"I'll ask. Me, yes--but don't forget that there very well may be people--or 
things--as far ahead of us as we are ahead of pointer pups. " 

"Huh! Balloon-juice and prop-wash! I just _know_, Clee, that you're the 
absolute tops of the whole, entire, macrocosmic universe. " 

"Well, we can dream, of course. " Garlock withdrew his mind from Belle's and 
turned his attention to the now quiet Semolo. "Well, my over-confident and 
contumacious young squirt; are you done horsing around or do you want to keep 
it up until you addle completely what few brains you have?" 

The Lizorian made no reply; but merely glared. 

"The trouble with you half-baked, juvenile--I almost added 'delinquent' to 
that, and perhaps I should have--Primes is that you know too damned much that 
isn't true. As an old Tellurian saying hath it, 'you're altogether too big for 
your britches. ' 

"Thus, simply because you have lived a few years on one single planet and 
haven't encountered anyone able to stand up to you, you've sold yourself on the 
idea that there's nobody, anywhere, who can. You're wrong--you couldn't be more 
so if you had an army to help you. 

"What, actually, have you done? What, actually, have you got? Practically 
nothing. You haven't even started a starship; you've scarcely started making 
plans. You realize dimly that the theory is not in any of the books, that 
you'll have to slug it out for yourself, but that is _work_. So you're still 
just posing and throwing your weight around. 

"As a matter of fact, you're merely a drop in a lake. The Upper Midvale is 
fordable almost anywhere at this season, so stay far enough away from the lake 
that none see you. Cross it, swing in a wide circle toward the peninsula on 
which sits Middlemarch Castle, and in three days. . . it could be. " 

"Exactly; and you can have your Brownie. " 

"I'm beginning to see. I didn't think you had anything like that in your 
chilled-steel carcass. And I want to apolo. . . . . but above all, an absolute 
integrity. . . " Garlock was floundering; to be called upon to explain his 
ingrained antipathy to such a custom was new to his experience. 

"You are silly. " She went into his arms again and nibbled on his left ear. 
"I'd go anywhere with you, of course, any time, but _this_--but you're 
positively _sure_ Sammy Small will be all right?" 

"Positively sure. " 

"Okay, I'll call mother. . . . . . . . " 

"There's plenty!" she snapped. "Plain, dumb stupidity, then, it must be. There 
must be _somebody_ around here who has been at least exposed to elementary 
biology! You should have exterminated these Ozobe vermin ages ago. All you have 
to do is find out what its life cycle is. How many stages and what they are. 
How the adults get into space and where they go," and she went on, in flashing 
thoughts, to explain in full detail. 

"Are you smart enough to understand that?" 

"Oh, yes. I had to play it as though the whole Oman race is no more important 
than a cigarette butt. " 

Ferber became purple and pounded his desk in consuming anger. 

Garlock yelled louder and pounded harder. "Start rounding up this stuff--but 
_fast_--or I'll come down there and take your job away from you and do it 
myself--and for your own greasy hide's sake you'd better believe I'm not just 
chomping my choppers, either. " 

"You'll _What?_" Ferber screamed. "_You're fired!_" 

"_You_ fire _me_?" Garlock mimicked the scream. "And make it stick? You'd 
better write that one up for the funnies. Why, you lard-brain, you couldn't 
fire a cap-pistol. " 

"Foster!" Ferber yelled. "Terminate Garlock as of now. Insubordination, and 
misconduct, abuse of position, incompetence, malfeasance--everything else you 
can think of. Blacklist him all over the System!" 

At the word "fired" Belle, had leaped to her feet and had stopped laughing. 

"Miss Bellamy!" Ferber snapped. 

"Yes, sir?" she answered, sweetly. 

"You are hereby promoted to be Head of the. . "woebegone" is the only word for 
it. "I have work to do. Projects, you know, of difficulty, of extreme 
complexity and scope, sometimes even approaching danger. A Lens would be of 
tremendous use. " 

"How?" Samms asked. "If your work is of enough importance to enough people, 
Mentor would certainly give you a Lens. 









The Secret Planet 



No human had ever landed on the hidden planet of Arisia. " 

"How about their power?" 

"I don't understand it very well--hardly at all, in fact. " 

"It is quite simple. And Herkimer Third isn't really a menace; he just thinks 
he is. Take a look--you can, can't you, with your Lens?" 

"Perhaps. . . . . . " Jack's thought snapped off as he tuned to a local 
Lensman. 

Jill's heart sank. She was starkly certain now that the Lensmen could not find 
her in time. 

"Tighten up a little, Eddie. You, too, Bob. " 

"Stop it! Oh, God, STOP IT!" The unbearable agony relaxed a little. She watched 
in horrified fascination a second glowing coal approach her bare right side. 
"Even if I do talk you'll kill me anyway. I don't see how anybody could help 
but be. We thought we'd be left here alone. We. . . . . " 

"Oh, chip-chop the jaw-flapping, Gordon!" Hilton snapped. Then, as the admiral 
began to bellow orders into his microphone, he went on: "You want it the hard 
way, eh? Watch what happens, all of you!" 



The _UC-1_ shot vertically into the air. Through its shallow dense layer and 
into and through the stratosphere. The development of machinery and tools gave 
them a big edge on the fish; and those living in the shallow seas, nearest the 
Islands, gradually became tributary nations, if not actually slaves. Those fish 
not only serve as food, but work in the mines, hatcheries, and plantations, and 
do all kinds of work for the Nevians. Those so-called 'lesser deeps' were 
conquered first, of course, and all their races of fish are docile enough now. 
But the deep-sea breeds, who live in water so deep that the Nevians can hardly 
stand the pressure down there, were more intelligent to start with, and more 
stubborn besides. But the most valuable metals here are deep down--this planet 
is very light for its size, you know--so the Nevians kept at it until they 
conquered some of the deep-sea fish, too, and put 'em to work. But those 
high-pressure boys were nobody's fools. They realized that as time went on the 
amphibians would get further and further ahead of them in development, so they 
let themselves be conquered, learned how to use the Nevians' tools and 
everything else they could get hold of, developed a lot of new stuff of their 
own, and now they're out to wipe the amphibians off the map completely, before 
they get too far ahead of them to handle. While the hexans are masters of rays, 
the humans are equally masters of explosives and of mechanisms. They can hit a 
perfect score upon any target in free space whose course and acceleration can 
be determined, at any range up to five thousand kilometers, and they have 
explosives thousands of times as powerful as any known to us. Ray screens are 
effective only against rays, and the hexans cannot destroy anything they cannot 
see before it strikes them. So it is that all the hexan vessels except those 
necessary to protect their own strongholds, are being concentrated against 
Callisto. They cannot spare vessels to guard uselessly the abandoned 
satellites. Because of the enormously high gravity of Jupiter the hexans there 
are safe from human attack save for ineffectual long-range bombardment, but Io 
is being attacked constantly and it is probable that in a few more years Io 
also will be an abandoned world. Some of you may have received the impressions 
that the hexans are to triumph immediately, but such an idea is wrong. The 
humans can, and will, hold out for a hundred years or more unless the enemy 
perfects a destructive ray of the type referred to. Even then, I think that our 
human cousins will hold out a long time. But the Nevians-- 

The horizontal, flat, fish-like body is not so bad, even supported as it is by 
four short, powerful, scaly, flat-footed legs; and terminating as it does in 
the weird, four-vaned tail. The neck, even, is endurable, although it is long 
and flexible, heavily scaled, and is carried in whatever eye-wringing loops or 
curves the owner considers most convenient or ornamental at the time. Even the 
smell of a Nevian--a malodorous reek of over-ripe fish--does in time become 
tolerable, especially if sufficiently disguised with creosote, which purely 
Terrestrial chemical is the most highly prized perfume of Nevia. But the head! 
It is that member that makes the Nevian so appalling to Earthly eyes, for it is 
a thing utterly foreign to all Solarian history or experience. As most 
Tellurians already know, it is fundamentally a massive cone, covered with 
scales, based spearhead-like upon the neck. Four great sea-green, triangular 
eyes are spaced equidistant from each other about half way up the cone. The 
pupils are contractile at will, like the eyes of the cat, permitting the Nevian 
to see equally well in any ordinary extreme of light or darkness. Immediately 
below each eye springs out a long, jointless, boneless, tentacular arm; an arm 
which at its extremity divides into eight delicate and sensitive, but very 
strong, "fingers. " Below each arm is a mouth: a beaked, needle-tusked orifice 
of dire potentialities. Finally, under the overhanging edge of the cone-shaped 
head are the delicately-frilled organs which serve either as gills or as 
nostrils and lungs, as may be desired. To other Nevians the eyes and other 
features are highly expressive, but to us they appear utterly cold and 
unmoving. Terrestrial senses can detect no changes of expression in a Nevian's 
"face. " Such were the frightful beings at whom the three prisoners stared with 
sinking hearts. From where?" 

"About four miles in on Six. It'll take time. " 

"But I can't, Conway, and neither can you," the girl answered softly, a 
glorious light in her eyes. "It's too late for that. He seized her right hand 
in both of his, held it up over her head, and waved it back and forth in the 
sign of victory. 

"Socked me with my own club!" he exulted, laughing delightedly, boyishly. "And 
came within a tenth of a split red hair! If it hadn't been so absolutely out of 
character you'd've got away with it. _What_ a load of stuff! I was right--of 
all the women on this project, you're the only one I've ever been really afraid 
of. " 

"Oh, damn. . . . . but we have been through so much together that I feel as 
though we had known each other forever. Hot Dog! Anyway, he wants us to and we 
want to so everything's lovely and so let's get to work on Fatso and his 
Foster. I think we ought to have some fun for a change and that'll be a lot. 
Not sudden death, of course. 

Women, their faces blotched and purple with emotion, shrieked and screamed. 
Men, stamping their feet and waving their arms, yelled and swore. And many, men 
and women alike, laid wagers. 

"Five hundred sesterces on Fermius!" one shouted, tablet and stylus in air. 

"Taken!" came an answering yell. "The Gaul is done--Patroclus all but had him 
there!" 

"One thousand, you!" came another challenge. "Patroclus missed his chance and 
will never get another--a thousand on Fermius!" 

"Two thousand!" 

"Five thousand!" 

"Ten!" 

The fighters closed--swung--stabbed. Shields clanged vibrantly under the impact 
of fended strokes, swords whined and snarled. Back and forth--circling--giving 
and taking ground--for minute after endless minute that desperately furious 
exhibition of skill, of speed and of power and of endurance went on. And as it 
went on, longer and longer past the time expected by even the most optimistic, 
tension mounted higher and higher. 

Blood flowed crimson down the Gaul's bare leg and the crowd screamed its 
approval. Blood trickled out of the joints of the Thracian's armor and it 
became a frenzied mob. 

No human body could stand that pace for long. 

"Now don't say again that you want to _do_ something," Sandra said, brightly. 
"If he makes a pass at her I'll get him if I have to blow this whole sphere out 
of space, with us in it!" 

"Don't do that, Conway," Clio's low voice, trembling but determined, was felt 
by both men. "If there's a chance for you to get away and do anything about 
fighting him, don't mind me. Ninety-nine per cent of your mind doesn't _want_ 
to believe it; is dead set against it. So it has to force its way through 
whillions and skillions of ohms of resistance, so only the most powerful 
stimuli--'maximum signal' in your jargon, perhaps?--can get through to you at 
all. " Suddenly she giggled like a schoolgirl. "You're either psychic or the 
biggest wolf in the known universe, and I know you aren't a wolf. If you hadn't 
been as psychic as I am, you'd've jumped clear out into subspace when a 
perfectly strange girl attacked you. " 

"How do you know so much about me?" 

"I made it a point to. "Am I. . . well, talking in mixed company, you know, but 
I think. . and you're right, of course, in your stand that we'll have to have 
Lensmen from as many different solar systems as possible on the Galactic 
Council or the thing won't work at all. So damned much jealousy--which is one 
reason why we're here in New York instead of out at The Hill, where we 
belong--we've found that out already, even in such a small and comparatively 
homogeneous group as our own system--the Solarian Council will not only have to 
be made up mostly of Lensmen, but each and every inhabited planet of Sol will 
have to be represented--even Pluto, I suppose, in time. And by the way, your 
Mr. Isaacson is about to promote a man who has proved very capable. Would you 
like to observe the proceedings?" 

"No. I have no time for minor matters. We won't starve. If you can't pay a 
hundred and fifty I'll come for a hundred, or seventy five, or fifty. 

"Why?" Hilton asked. "It'd look still better if I peeled down to the 
altogether. " 

"You're incorrigible," she said, but her answering grin was wide and perfectly 
natural. "You know, if I had had a brother something like you it would have 
saved me a lot of wear and tear. " Hilton was bending over a group in bronze. 
"If I didn't know better, I'd swear this is the original deHaven 'Dance of the 
Nymphs'. " 

Karns had marched up to and was examining minutely a two-by-three-foot 
painting, in a heavy gold frame, of a gorgeously auburn-haired nude. 
"Reproduction, hell! This is a _duplicate_! Lawrence's 'Innocent' is worth 
twenty million wogs and it's sealed behind quad armor-glass in Prime Art--but 
I'll bet wogs to wiggles the Prime Curator himself, with all his apparatus, 
couldn't tell this one from his!" 

"I wouldn't take even one wiggle's worth of that. And this 'Laughing Cavalier' 
and this 'Toledo' are twice as old and twice as fabulously valuable. " 

"And there are my own golf clubs. . " 

"Clee!" Belle drove the thought. "Cut out the monkey-business with those damn 
firecrackers of yours and look here--pure, solid force, like ball lightning or 
our Op field, but entirely different--see if you can analyze the stuff!" 

"Alive?" Garlock asked, as he drove a probe into one of the things--they were 
furiously-radiating spheres some seven feet in diameter--and began to tune to 
it. 

"I don't know--don't think so--if they are, they're a form of life that no sane 
human being could even imagine!" 

"Let's see what they actually do," Garlock suggested, still trying to tune in 
with the thing, whatever it was, and still following it down. 

This particular force-ball happened to hit the top of a six-story building. It 
was not going very fast--fifteen or twenty miles an hour--but when it struck 
the roof it did not even slow down. Without any effort at all, apparently, it 
continued downward through the concrete and steel and glass of the building; 
and everything in its path became monstrously, sickeningly, revoltingly 
changed. 

"I simply can't stand any more of this," Lola gasped. "We are so far away from 
the earth that even the fixed stars are unrecognizable. The power was on 
exactly forty-eight hours, since that is the life of that particular bar under 
full current. We should still be close to our own solar system, since it is 
theoretically impossible to develop any velocity greater than that of light. We 
ragged him about it a lot--and he was right. I thought, of course, they'd drift 
with us, but they are using power steadily. If the rise is open I'll give you a 
flash. Wright, you throw a chippie into it from the bottom. You others, work 
back along the drift, clear to the last glory hole. Teddy in turn called in 
Becky and de Vaux; Karns wanted Poynter and Beverly; Poynter wanted Braden and 
the twins; and so on. Thus, what started out as a conference of two became a 
full Ardan staff meeting; a meeting which, starting immediately after lunch, 
ran straight through into the following afternoon. 

"To sum up the consensus, for the record," Hilton said then, studying a sheet 
of paper covered with symbols, "the Stretts haven't attacked yet because they 
found out that we are stronger than they are. They found that out by analyzing 
our defensive web--which, if we had had this meeting first, we wouldn't have 
put up at all. Unlike anything known to human or previous Strett science, it is 
proof against any form of attack up to the limit of the power of its 
generators. They will attack as soon as they are equipped to break that screen 
at the level of power probable to our ships. We can not arrive at any reliable 
estimate as to how long that will take. 

"As to the effectiveness of our cutting off their known fuel supply, opinion is 
divided. We must therefore assume that fuel shortage will not be a factor. 

"Neither are we unanimous on the basic matter as to why the Masters acted as 
they did just before they left Ardry. Why did they set the status so far below 
their top ability? Why did they make it impossible for the Omans ever, of 
themselves, to learn their higher science? Why, if they did not want that 
science to become known, did they leave complete records of it? The majority of 
us believe that the Masters coded their records in such fashion that the 
Stretts, even if they conquered the Omans or destroyed them, could never break 
that code; since it was keyed to the basic difference between the Strett 
mentality and the human. Thus, they left it deliberately for some human race to 
find. 

"Air!" Willoughby snorted. "I'll swap you a hundred flasks of air, any time, 
for any one of those leaves!" Which was what Samms wanted to know. 

Captain Willoughby was smart. He knew that the way to succeed was to use and 
then to trample upon his inferiors; to toady to such superiors as were too 
strong to be pulled down and thus supplanted. He knew this Olmstead had what it 
took to be a big shot. Can you stand up yet?" 

Gripping the desk with both hands, Samms heaved himself to his feet. His right 
hand, concealing something which he had not mentioned and which was probably 
starkly unmentionable, approached her taut-stretched throat. 

"Talk or not, just as you please. " The voice was utterly callous, as chill as 
the death she now knew he was so willing to deal. "But listen. If you elect to 
talk, tell the truth. You won't lie twice. I may be as far off the beam on one 
side as you are on the other. " 

"I hope so. " Temple's natural fine color began to come back. "But it's 
understood that just the second you come out of the vat, I go right in. " 

"I hadn't ought to let you, of course. If he could have got what he wanted, ten 
full seconds, or even nine, he could have made it, but. . . . . . . . " 

"Enough. Second Lieutenant Wells, from now. GHQ will confirm. Take charge of 
all the guns we have. Report when you have made disposition. Now, Kinnison, 
listen. 

"You can't tell what ideas may be useful--chip in any time you feel the urge. 
Here's the dope, as I see it. But now what'll we do? We can't cancel without 
letting them know we're onto them, and we certainly can't use this stuff. Rays 
six, seven, eight, nine, and ten. . . . " 

"Or you could, Rod. " 





"No, that's straight data, right on zero across the panel," he assured her. 
"And as for your questions, they're easy. No, I haven't looked for the comet 
yet, because we'll have to drift for a couple of days before we'll be anywhere 
near where I think it is. No, they can't trace us, because there is now nothing 
to trace, unless they can detect the slight power we are using in our lights 
and so on--which possibility is vanishingly small. Potentially, our beam still 
exists, but since we are drawing no power, it has no actual present existence. 
See?" 

"Uh-uh," she dissented. "I can't say that I can quite understand how a beam can 
exist potentially and yet not be there actually enough to trace. Why, a thing 
has to be actual or not exist at all--you can't possibly have something that is 
nothing. With that outfit, if we should get separated, you can talk to 
us--we're both wearing 'em, although in somewhat different forms. You don't 
need to talk loud--just a mutter will be enough. They're handy little 
outfits--almost impossible to find, and capable of a lot of things. " 

"Thanks, Conway--I'll remember that, too," Clio replied, as she turned toward 
the tiny locker to follow his instructions. "But won't the scouts and patrols 
be catching us pretty quick? The operator sent a warning. " 

"Afraid the ether's empty, as far as we're concerned. " 

Captain Bradley had stood by in silent astonishment during this conversation. 
His eyes had bulged slightly at Costigan's "we're both wearing 'em," but he had 
held his peace and as the girl disappeared a look of dawning comprehension came 
over his face. Dorothy returned and handed him everything she had found. 

"I would like to keep this ring," she said slowly, pointing to a slender 
circlet of gold set with a solitaire diamond, "if you think there is any chance 
of us getting clear. " 

"Everything goes that has any copper in it," he said coldly, "and I am glad to 
see that Seaton is too good a chemist to buy any platinum jewelry. You may keep 
the diamond, though," as he wrenched the jewel out of its setting and returned 
it to her. Food, uranexite or its concentrated derivative, interchangeably. 
Storage reserve, indefinite. Laro and Sora won't _have_ to eat again for at 
least twenty-five years. . " 

"Huh? They haven't got the guts," Hazel sneered. "Come on, Jane. 

"Aren't you even going to kiss mama goodbye, baby boy?" she taunted. 

"Better not waste much more time. We blow this boat, sealed or open, in fifteen 
seconds. Up a series of ramps they took the still form, placing it finally upon 
a soft couch in an enormous and heavily guarded central hall. Costigan turned 
to his companion, and even through the helmets she could see plainly the white 
agony of his expression. He moistened his lips and tried twice to speak--tried 
and failed; but he made no move either to cut off their power or to change 
their direction. 

"Of course," she approved steadily. 

"How about coming back to Tellus with me, Virge?" he asked, when the visiting 
was done. "You must have decided on at least some of them, by this time. . 
Ready, all? Start blasting. " 

"Don't trust it too much, because he can cut it off from the outside any time 
he wants to. Everything has been kept, changelessly the same, awaiting your 
return as you ordered so long ago. " 

"Can you read my mind?" Hilton demanded. 

"Of course; but Omans can not read in Masters' minds anything except what 
Masters want Omans to read. " 

"Omans?" Harkins asked. "Where did you Omans and your masters come from? 
Originally?" 

"As you know, Master, the Masters came originally from Arth. They populated 
Ardu, where we Omans were developed. We keep also this, your half of the Fuel 
World, in trust for you. Therefore, I am going to let you go ahead without me 
as far as you can--it won't be far. Do you want me to come in now or later?" 

"I'm afraid we can't do business on any such terms as that," said Brookings, 
shaking his head. "We can undoubtedly buy the power rights from Seaton for what 
you ask. 

No part of this book may be reprinted without written permission of the 
publishers. 

All Rights Reserved. " 

"You don't fool me for a second, Brookings. That will cure him of sucking 
eggs!" he muttered. "Operator? DuQuesne speaking. I am expecting a call this 
afternoon. Please ask him to call me at my house. They have one man in front 
and one in back, a couple of detectaphones in my rooms here, and have coupled 
onto this telephone. 

"Don't worry," he continued calmly as the other made an exclamation of dismay. 
"Talk ahead as loud as you please--they can't hear you. Do you think that those 
poor, ignorant flat feet can show me anything about electricity? I'd shoot a 
jolt along their wires that would burn their ears off if it weren't my cue to 
act the innocent and absorbed scientist. As it is, their instruments are all 
registering dense silence. But after an hour of waiting, and while the 
microphones made a noise as of rustling papers, the needle of the compass 
moved. It dipped slowly toward the earth as though DuQuesne were descending 
into the cellar, but at the same time the shadow of his unmistakable profile 
was thrown upon the window shade as he apparently crossed the room. 

"Can't you hear him walk?" demanded Prescott. 

"No. . . . . . more priestess-like, say?" 

"Perhaps. " Phagon was very evidently skeptical, but looked around the temple, 
anyway. "Trycie!" he yelled. 

"Yes, father?" a soft voice answered--right behind them! 

The king's second daughter was very like his first in size and shape, but her 
eyes were a cerulean blue and her hair, as long and as thick as Rhoann's own, 
had the color of ripe wheat. 

"Aye, daughter. Wouldst like to be Priestess of Llosir?" 

"Oh, yes!" she squealed; but sobered quickly. "On second thought. . that'd be 
ten an hour. I'll take him apart with my bare hands. " 

"We will find him, Dick," Crane replied in a level, deadly voice entirely 
unlike his usual tone. "That is one thing money can do. " 

"All right. But I _would_ like to find out whether I'm two years older than I 
think I am, or not!" 

Then for four hours they put the great super-ship through her paces, just as 
test-pilots check up on every detail of performance of an airplane of new and 
radical design. They found that the horrible vertigo could be endured, perhaps 
in time even conquered as space-sickness could be conquered, by a strong will 
in a sound body; and that their new conveyance had possibilities of which even 
Rodebush had never dreamed. Finally, their most pressing questions answered, 
they turned their most powerful ultra-beam communicator toward the yellowish 
star which they knew to be Old Sol. 

"Samms. . . . . . . . . . . the priests who performed the sacrifices and who 
fattened on the fractions. . . . . . . . " 

"But _they_ were always the Masters, sir!" 

"They were not! They were hopelessly enslaved. Think it over. Anyway, say they 
went _to_ Terra from here. That still accounts for the legends and so on. 
However, they were too far gone to make a recovery, and yet they had enough 
fixity of purpose _not_ to manufacture any of you Omans there. So their 
descendants went a long way down the scale before they began to work back up. 
Does that make sense to you?" 



"It explains many things, sir. And now I think you'd better shuffle along; 
enough of this is a great plenty!" 

Baxter went to his own cubby, and each man of gray Roger's cold-blooded crew 
methodically took up his task. True to prediction, in five days a planet loomed 
beneath them and their vessel settled through a reeking atmosphere toward a 
rocky and forbidding plain. Then for hours they plunged along, a few thousand 
feet above the surface of that strange world, while Roger with his analytical 
detectors sought the most favorable location from which to wrest the materials 
necessary for his program of construction. 

It was a world of cold; its sun was distant, pale, and wan. It had monstrous 
forms of vegetation, of which each branch and member writhed and fought with a 
grotesque and horrible individual activity. Ever and anon a struggling part 
broke from its parent plant and darted away in independent existence; leaping 
upon and consuming or being consumed by a fellow creature equally monstrous. 
This flora was of a uniform color, a lurid, sickly yellow. In form some of it 
was fern-like, some cactus-like, some vaguely tree-like; but it was all 
outrageous, inherently repulsive to all Solarian senses. And no less hideous 
were the animal-like forms of life which slithered and slunk rapaciously 
through that fantastic pseudo-vegetation. Snake-like, reptile-like, bat-like, 
the creatures squirmed, crawled, and flew; each covered with a dankly oozing 
yellow hide and each motivated by twin common impulses--to kill and insatiably 
and indiscriminately to devour. Over this reeking wilderness Roger drove his 
vessel, untouched by its disgusting, its appalling ferocity and horror. 

"There should be intelligence, of a kind," he mused, and swept the surface of 
the planet with an exploring beam. "Don't you see, you big, dense, wonderful 
man, that it is the only thing to do? We need each other, or at least, I need 
you, so much now. . " and the unexpurgated, trenchant, brilliantly detailed 
characterization could have seared its way through four-ply asbestos. "And just 
what do you think you're going to do with me?" 

"As to the first, I think so," Kinnison replied, ignoring the deep-space 
verbiage. "As to the second--as of now I don't know. What would you do if our 
situations were reversed?" 

"I'd blast you to a cinder--or else take a knife and. . . . . " 

"Wouldn't, you mean," Samms corrected. 

"Couldn't," Kinnison insisted. "Jill, besides being your daughter and Lensman 
grade, had no official connection with either the Triplanetary Service or the 
Solarian Patrol. And the Service, including Fairchild, is still Triplanetary; 
and it will have to stay Triplanetary until you have found enough Lensmen so 
that you can spring your twin surprises--Galactic Council and Galactic Patrol. 
However, Northrop and Fairchild are keeping their eyes and ears open and their 
mouths shut, and Jill is finding out whatever she can about drugs and so on, as 
well as the various political angles. They'll report to you--facts, deductions, 
guesses, and recommendations--whenever you say the word. " 

"Nice work, Rod. Very, _very_ nice. Shall we. . here, you hold it, so that I 
can have both hands free. Put both arms around me, just under the arms, and 
stick to me like a porous plaster, because if I have to move at all, I'll have 
to jump like chain lightning. Shine the beam right over there, so it'll reflect 
and light up all the dials at once. There. You can try it on me, if you like. " 

"Uh-uh. More like being stretched all out of shape. Like having a child, maybe, 
in a small way. No one paid any attention to the thoughts of anyone else except 
in the case of couples or groups, the units of which were engaged in 
conversation. It reminded Garlock of a big Tellurian party when the punch-bowls 
were running low--everybody talking at the top of his voice and nobody 
listening. 

This whole gale of thought was blowing over Garlock's receptors like a Great 
Plains wind over miles-wide fields of corn. He did not address anyone directly; 
no one addressed him. At first, quite a few young women, at sight of his 
unusual physique, had sent out tentative feelers of thought; and some men had 
wondered, in the same tentative and indirect fashion, who he was and where he 
came from. However, when the information he had given Atterlin spread 
throughout the city--and it did not take long--no one paid any more attention 
to him than they did to each other. 

Probing into and through various buildings, he learned that groups of people 
were quitting work at intervals of about fifteen minutes. Anything else I can 
do for you, whoever you are?" 

"No. Your job's done. Until then, we'll let him think he's Top Dog. Let him 
rave. But Ferdy, any time he's behind me or out of sight, watch him like a 
hawk. Shoot him through the right elbow if he makes one sour move. " 

"I get you, boss. " 



A couple of evenings later, in Lifecraft Two, Barbara said: "You're worried, 
Babe, and everything's going so smoothly. . . " 

"She still isn't. She hasn't. It'll take her a week to get back into shape. 
Hope nothing else happens--if I drag you into any more such messes as those 
we've just been getting out of by the skin of our teeth, I'll begin to wish 
that we had started out at first to drift it back to Tellus in the _Hope_. 
Let's see how much time we've got. We should start shooting one day after an 
eclipse, so that we'll have five days to send. You see, we don't want to point 
our beam too close to Jupiter or to any of the large satellites, because the 
enemy might live there and might intercept it. We had an eclipse yesterday--so 
one week from today, at sunrise, I start shooting. " 

"But Earth's an evening star now; you can't see it in the morning. " 

"I'm not going to aim at Tellus. I'm shooting at Brandon, and he's never there 
for more than a week or two at a stretch. How long would it take to get there? 
Could they get back? Wouldn't they save time by casting themselves adrift, 
making the repairs most urgently needed, and going back to Ganymede under their 
own power? But would they have enough power left in the wreck to get even that 
far? And how about the big tube? He was interrupted by an insistent thought 
from Barkovis. 

"You will save time, Stevens, by coming with us to Titan. There we shall aid 
you in repairing your vessel and in completing your transmitting tube, in which 
we shall be deeply interested. "There--we'll be just about traveling with it 
when we get there," he said. "Now, little K. " 

"How can they possibly find us? I seem to be always worried about the wrong 
things, but I should think that their finding us would be the least of our 
troubles. " 

"Don't judge their vision system by ours--they've got everything, apparently. 
However, their apparatus may not be delicate enough to spot us in a space this 
small when their projectors flash through it, as they probably will. Then, too, 
there's a couple of other big items in our favor--nobody else is in the entire 
lower half, since all this machinery down here is either automatic or else 
controlled from up above, so they won't be expecting to see anybody when they 
get down this far; and we aren't at all conspicuous. We're both dressed in 
gray--your clothes in particular are almost exactly the color of this 
armor-plate--so altogether we stand a good chance of being missed. " 

"What shall we do now?" 

"Nothing whatever--wish we could sleep for a couple of hours, but of course 
there's no hope of that. Stretch out here, like that--you can't rest folded up 
like an accordion--and I'll lie down diagonally across the room. There's just 
room for me that way. Fire me first thing in the morning and send me back to 
Earth in a torp. It almost did--only a last-instant, full-powered side thrust 
enabled the target to evade it. Two numbers flashed white upon his plate; his 
actual error, exact to the foot of distance and to the degree on the clock, 
measured and transmitted back to his board by instruments in his torpedo. 

Working with instantaneous and exact data, and because the enemy had so little 
time in which to act, Kinnison's second projectile made a very near miss 
indeed. His third was a graze; so close that its proximity fuze functioned, 
detonating the cyclonite-packed war-head. Kinnison knew that his third went 
off, because the error-figures vanished, almost in the instant of their coming 
into being, as its detecting and transmitting instruments were destroyed. That 
one detonation might have been enough; but Kinnison had had one glimpse of his 
error--how small it was!--and had a fraction of a second of time. Hence Four 
and Five slammed home; dead center. Whatever that target had been, it was no 
longer a threat. It was a "new" one, and thus it would be a long time before it 
would become other than a local menace. And well before that could 
happen--before even the oldest of Tellus' loose vortices had eaten away much of 
her mass or poisoned much of her atmosphere, her scientists would have solved 
the problem. It was unthinkable that Tellus, the point of origin and the very 
center of Galactic Civilization, should cease to exist. 



But to Neal Cloud the accident was the ultimate catastrophe. His personal 
universe had crashed in ruins; what was left was not worth picking up. He and 
Jo had been married for almost twenty years and the bonds between them had 
grown stronger, deeper, truer with every passing day. And the kids. . sure. " 
Olmstead laughed quietly. Therefore: 

"They told me to keep you in the dark until we got to Trenco," he more than 
half apologized to his Fourth Officer shortly after the _Virgin Queen_ blasted 
away from the Trenconian system. "But they didn't say anything about 
afterwards--maybe they figured you wouldn't be aboard any more, as usual--but 
anyway, you can stay right here in the control room if you want to. " 

"Thanks, Skipper, but mightn't it be just as well," he jerked his head 
inconspicuously toward the other officers, "to play the string out, this trip? 
I don't care where we're going, and we don't want anybody to get any funny 
ideas. " 

"That'd be a lot better, of course--as long as you know that your cards are all 
aces, as far as I'm concerned. " 

"Thanks, Willoughby. Stop at the cashier's office on your way out. Good-bye. " 

Thus the Lensmen--particularly First Lensman Virgil Samms--brought another 
sector of the galaxy under the aegis of Civilization. 











After the Rally there were a few days during which neither Samms nor Kinnison 
was on Earth. That the Cosmocrats' presidential candidate and the First Lensman 
were both with the Fleet was not a secret; in fact, it was advertised. Everyone 
was told why they were out there, and almost everyone approved. Nadia insisted 
that she, too, needed to work, and that she was altogether too good a mechanic 
to waste; therefore the two again labored mightily together, day after day. But 
the girl limited rigidly their hours of work to those of the working day; and 
evening after evening Barkovis visited with them for hours. Dressed in his 
heavy space-suit and supported by a tractor beam well out of range of what 
seemed to him terrific heat radiated by the bodies of the Terrestrials, he 
floated along unconcernedly; while over the multiplex cable of the 
thought-exchanger he conversed with the man and woman seated just inside the 
open outer door of their air-lock. The Titanian's appetite for information was 
insatiable--particularly did he relish everything pertaining to the earth and 
to the other inner planets, forever barred to him and to his kind. In return 
Stevens and Nadia came gradually to know the story of the humanity of Titan. We 
start in one minute. " 

The surveyor came in. "Forty one minutes is my best guess. " 

"From when?" 

"From the time the pump failed. " Hilton brought Kincaid up to date. " 

"Save your breath or talk sense," said Seaton, coldly. "I gave you English so 
that you can give me the information I want. You already know what it is. Speed 
is not of the essence; justice very definitely is. " 

"'Crusader' Samms, now and forever! But I'll buy it, Virge--now let's get back 
down to earth. Operation Zwilnik is all set. Virgil was going to do it tonight, 
after the brawl here, but you know as much about it now as any of us. "Tell the 
goddam rat the truth!" Jack's thought drove on. "It won't make any 
difference--he won't live long enough to pass it on!" 

"But I can't--I won't!" Jill stormed. "Why, Pops Kinnison would. . . . " 
Whatever Samms could say would make things worse. The truth, wild as it was, 
would have to be told, at least in part. "You do not look like an Italian, but 
perhaps you have enough of that racial heritage to believe in prophecy?" 

"Of course, sir. There have always been prophets--_true_ prophets. " 

"Good. Keep your shield up. " 

"Oh, we're so glad to see you, Captain Garlock, sir!" The blonde, who was 
dressed little more heavily than the cigarette girls in Venusberg's Cartier 
Room, seized his left hand in both of hers and held it considerably longer than 
was necessary. Her dazzling smile, her laughing eyes, her flashing white teeth, 
the many exposed inches of her skin, and her completely unshielded mind; all 
waved banners of welcome. 

"Captain Garlock, sir, Governor Atterlin has been most anxious to see you ever 
since you were first detected. This way, please, sir. " 

"We will, sir, and thank you very much. Kinnison. Now, First Lensman Samms, our 
clients all want to know all about the Lens. We all know what it _does_, but 
what, really, _is_ it? Who invented it? How does it work?" 

Kinnison started to say something, but Samms silenced him with a thought. 

"I will answer those questions by asking you one. " 

Acting upon this suggestion, the party seated themselves upon comfortable 
divans, and Dunark rapidly dismantled the machine he had constructed. The 
captives remained standing, always behind the visitors until Seaton 
remonstrated. 

"I approve of you, Tedric. " 

Down the _Pleiades_ went, into the air of the nation known as the "Allied 
Republican Democracies of the World," and an atomic-warheaded rocket came 
flaming up. 

"Hm. . " 

He whirled and caught her as she slumped, but she did not quite faint. 

"Quick! Get in. . " 

"Northrop! Jack!" came Virgil Samms' highly concerned thought. The 
superdreadnaught flashed alongside, a bare few hundred miles away, and stopped. 
"Why did you stop _here_?" 

"This is where our signal came from, sir. " 

"Oh. . . I wonder. Crane?" 

"That is rather unjustifiably high praise, Miss Spencer," replied Crane, "but 
as I have been guilty of one or two things along that line, I may be the man he 
meant. " 

"Pardon me if I seem to change the subject," put in Seaton, "but where's 
DuQuesne?" 

"We came to at the same time, and he went into the galley to fix up something 
to eat. " 

"Good for him!" exclaimed Dorothy. "I'm simply starved to death. " 

DuQuesne looked at her keenly. Especially Karns, the team chief. 

"I can see where this would be habit-forming," Hilton said, "and very deadly. 
_Extremely_ deadly. " 

"Every wish granted. Surrounded by all this. " Karns swept his arm through 
three-quarters of a circle. "Waited on hand and foot by powerful men and by the 
materializations of the dreams of the greatest, finest artists who ever lived. 
Fatal? I don't know. . Yes. . . No, sir, they aren't. " 

"Get 'em, Larry. Those animals were undoubtedly intelligent beings; they 
probably are a race of savages of this satellite. " 

"Then the really civilized races are probably. " 

"I confirm, Lola, of course," Garlock said; then went on, partly thinking 
aloud, partly addressing the group at large. You two are really serious, aren't 
you? Marriage, declarations, registration, and everything? I wish--I sincerely 
and really wish you--every happiness possible. " 

"We really _are_ serious," James said, putting his arm around Lola's waist. 
"And you won't. " Kinnison offered one last objection. "Without your Lens, 
_anything_ can happen to you. " 

"You are both wrong," said Vaneman. "You, Martin, haven't enough imagination; 
and you, Dick, have altogether too much, for either of you to have done this 
alone. The honor will be divided equally between you. " 



He turned to Crane as Dorothy and Seaton set out toward the house. " 

"You're probably right, son--I know you, and I know Martin Crane. Together, and 
in the _Skylark_, I believe you invincible. Then, with bewildering rapidity, he 
went into action; face glued to the visiplate, hands moving faster than the eye 
could follow--the left closing and opening the switch controlling the zone of 
force, the right swinging the steering controls to all points of the sphere. 
The mighty vessel staggered this way and that, jerking and straining terribly 
as the zone was thrown on and off, lurching sickeningly about the central 
bearing as the gigantic power of the driving bar was exerted, now in one 
direction, now in another. After a second or two of this mad gyration, Seaton 
shut off the power. He then released the zone, after assuring himself that both 
inner and outer screens were operating at the highest possible rating. 

"There, that'll hold 'em for a while, I guess. "I want to see if they've got 
many of those space-ships in action, and you will want to see what war is like, 
when it is fought by people, who have been making war steadily for ten thousand 
years. " 

Poised at the limit of clear visibility, the two men studied the incessant 
battle being waged beneath them. They saw not one, but fully a thousand of the 
globular craft high in the air and grouped in a great circle around an immense 
fortification upon the ground below. They saw no airships in the line of 
battle, but noticed that many such vessels were flying to and from the front, 
apparently carrying supplies. You are the last man I would have expected to be 
scared off after one engagement. " 

"Don't be any more of a fool than you have to, Brookings. Went to sleep in a 
chair and slept seventeen hours without a break. Seven hours and a half is a 
luxury, you know. " 

"All wrong, old top. I thought you were out after bigger game. " 

Belle's face went stiff and still. "What do you mean by that?" 

"Plain enough, I would think. Wherever you are, you've got to be the Boss. " 



A couple of evenings later, in Lifecraft Two, Barbara said: "You're worried, 
Babe, and everything's going so smoothly. . or is it?" 

He triggered the shields, she watched him do it. "It is now," he assured her. 
"I don't know whether Dad is going to kill Morgan or not--and don't give a 
damn--but if Morgan isn't going all out to kill Dad it's because they've 
forgotten how to make bombs. " 

He Lensed a call to Bergenholm. 

"We lined up a thousand and one signals, sir," Northrop reported for the pair, 
"but only one of them carried a message, and it didn't make sense. " 

"Why not?" Samms asked, sharply. "All I know about it is a hazy idea of what 
the word means, but I'll start studying as soon as we get squared away. " 

"Thanks. " 

There were two barbers and two chairs, both empty. The Lensmen, noticing that 
the place was neatly kept and meticulously clean, sat down and resumed their 
discussion of two extremely unusual infants. The barbers went busily to work. 
The Lensmen, noticing that the place was neatly kept and meticulously clean, 
sat down and resumed their discussion of two extremely unusual infants. The 
barbers went busily to work. 

"Just as well, though--better, really--that the kids didn't marry each other, 
at that," Kinnison concluded finally. "The way it is, we've each got a 
grandson--it'd be tough to have to share one with _you_. " 

Samms made no reply to this sally, for something was happening. The fact that 
this fair-skinned, yellow-haired blue-eyed barber was left-handed had not rung 
any bells--there were lots of left-handed barbers. He had neither seen nor 
heard the cat--a less-than-half-grown, gray, tiger-striped kitten--which, after 
standing up on its hind legs to sniff ecstatically at his nylon-clad ankles, 
had uttered a couple of almost inaudible "meows" and had begun to purr happily. 
Crouching, tensing its strong little legs, it leaped almost vertically upward. 
"The power is gone, the controls are wrecked, and we are hopelessly lost in 
space. " 

"Oh, I wouldn't say 'hopelessly,'" returned the other, "I have never been in 
any situation yet that I couldn't get out of, and I won't be convinced until I 
am dead that I can't get out of this one. We have two extra power bars, we can 
fix the board, and if I can't navigate us back close enough to our solar system 
to find it, I am more of a dub than I think I am. How about a little bite to 
eat?" 

"Show us where it is!" exclaimed Dorothy. 

"Anything that's sweet, apparently, with just enough milk to furnish a little 
protein. Won't eat meat or vegetables at all--von Steiffel says they haven't 
got much of a digestive tract, and I know that they haven't got any teeth. He's 
already eaten most all the syrup we had on board, all of the milk chocolate, 
and a lot of the sugar. But none of us can get any kind of a raise out of him 
at all--not even Nadia, when she fed him a whole box of chocolates. " 

"No, I mean what does he eat when he's home?" 

"It seems to be a sort of syrup, made from the juices of jungle plants, which 
they drag in on automatic conveyors and process on automatic machinery. But 
he's a funny mutt--hard to get. Some of his thoughts are lucid enough, but 
others we can't make out at all--they are so foreign to all human nature that 
they simply do not register as thoughts at all. One funny thing, he isn't the 
least bit curious about anything. He doesn't want to examine anything, doesn't 
ask us any questions, and won't tell us anything about anything, so that all we 
know about him we found out purely by accident. For instance, they like games 
and sports, and seem to have families. They also have love, liking, and respect 
for others of their own race--but they seem to have no emotions whatever for 
outsiders. They're utterly inhuman--I can't describe it--you'll have to get it 
for yourself. " 

"Did you find out about the Callistonians who went to see them?" 

"Negatively, yes. They never arrived. He got acquainted. He saw. He approved. 

"How about coming back to Tellus with me, Virge?" he asked, when the visiting 
was done. "You must have decided on at least some of them, by this time. He 
located the terminator on the morning side, poised his little ship somewhat 
nearer to dawn than to midnight, and "cut the rope". He took one quick reading 
on the sun, cut off his plates, and let her drop, watching only his pressure 
gages and gyros. 

One hundred millimeters of mercury. Three hundred. There will be twenty 
sections of ten persons, each section being in charge of one of the officers of 
the _Arcturus_. Doctor Penfield, our surgeon, a man whose intelligence, 
fairness, and integrity are unquestioned, will be in supreme command. His power 
and authority will be absolute, limited only by the Callistonian Council. He 
will work in harmony with the engineer, who is to direct the entire project of 
building the new vessel. Each of you will be expected to do whatever he 
can--the work you will be asked to do will be well within your powers, and you 
will each have ample leisure for recreation, study, and amusement, of all of 
which you will find unsuspected stores in this underground community. You will 
each be registered and studied by physicians, surgeons, and psychologists; and 
each of you will have prescribed for him the exact diet that is necessary for 
his best development. You will find this diet somewhat monotonous, compared to 
our normal fare of natural products, since it is wholly synthetic; but that is 
one of the minor drawbacks that must be endured. Chief Pilot Breckenridge and I 
will not be with you. In some small and partial recompense for what they are 
doing for us all, he and I are going with Captain Czuv to Callisto, there to 
see whether or not we can aid them in any way in the fight against the hexans. 
One last word--Doctor Penfield's rulings will be the products of his own 
well-ordered mind after consultation and agreement with the Council of this 
city, and will be for the best good of all. I do not anticipate any refusal to 
cooperate with him. If, however, such refusal should occur, please remember 
that he is a despot with absolute power, and that anyone obstructing the 
program by refusing to follow his suggestions will spend the rest of his time 
here in confinement and will go back to Tellus in irons, if at all. In case 
Chief Pilot Breckenridge and I should not see you again, we bid you goodbye and 
wish you a safe voyage--but we expect to go back with you. " 

Brief farewells were said and captain and pilot accompanied Czuv to one of the 
little street-cars. Out of the building it dashed and down the crowded but 
noiseless thoroughfare to the portal. Signal lights flashed briefly there and 
they did not stop, but tore on through the portal and the tunnel, with 
increasing speed. Jones punched another button; a foot-thick barrier of 
asbestos, tungsten, and vitrified refractory slid smoothly across the tunnel's 
opening. He considered briefly, pityingly, those who might be outside, but felt 
no urge to explore. If any lived, there were buttons on the other side of the 
fire-door. 

The eddying smoke disappeared, the flaring lights winked out, air-horns and 
bells relapsed into silence. The shift-boss, now apparently the Superintendent 
of the whole Twelfth Level, removed his mask, found the Station walkie-talkie, 
and snapped a switch. He spoke, listened, spoke again then called a list of 
names--none of which brought any response. 

"Wright, and you five others," picking out miners who could be depended upon to 
keep their heads, "take these guns. Shoot if you have to, but not unless you 
have to. " 

"Now, you sheet-iron bucket of nuts and bolts, _jump_!" and Garlock snapped the 
red switch. 

Earth lay beneath them. So did Port Gunther. 

"Hu-u-u-uh!" Garlock's huge sigh held much more of relief than of triumph. 

"They did it! We're home!" Lola shrieked; and, breaking into unashamed and 
unrestrained tears, went into her husband's extended arms. 

"Cry ahead, sweet. I'd bawl myself if Garlock wasn't looking. Maybe I will, 
anyway," James said. Seaton, my enemy, already has one of your vessels--don't 
think he is too much of a fool to put it back together and to learn its every 
secret. Then, too, remember that I have your mind, and can get along without 
you; even though I am willing to admit that you could be of enough help to me 
so that I would save your life in exchange for that help. But I can give you an 
idea of what we both think it may come to. " 

"Yes, do. . . " Garlock showed Alsyne. 

"I see. But you have suspicions or ideas? You can guess?" 

"I can guess; but that's all it would be--a guess. " 

"And my guess, folks, is that his guess would be a very highly informed guess. 
" 

He put his left arm around her and applied a tiny pressure against her side; 
under which she began to move slowly toward his door. 

"You admit that you're using force?" she asked. Knowing what they evidently do 
know, it's hard to see how they could have missed it. And yet, if they had 
known about it for a long time, wouldn't they be able to get through it? Of 
course it may be a real and total barrier in the ether--in that case they'd 
know that they couldn't do a thing as long as we keep it on. Take your choice, 
but I believe that they know about it, and know more than we do--that it is a 
total barrier set up in the ether. " 

"I agree with you, and we shall proceed upon that assumption. From that they 
derive the secondary assumption that humanoid types will be scarce. You and Jim 
both, then, will know what you're doing, while Belle and I are trying to play 
ours by ear. " 

"Where do we draw the line between humanoid and non-human?" 

"In case of doubt we'll confer. That covers it as much as we can, I think. Take 
us down, Jim--and be on your toes to take evasive action fast. " 



The ship dropped rapidly toward an airport just outside a fairly large city. 
Fifty thousand--forty thousand--thirty thousand feet. 

"Calling strange spaceship--you must be a spaceship, in spite of your 
tremendous, hitherto-considered-impossible mass--" a thought impinged on all 
four Tellurian minds, "do you read me?" 

"I read you clearly. This is the Tellurian spaceship _Pleiades_, Captain 
Garlock commanding, asking permission to land and information as to landing 
conventions. " He did not have to tell James to stop the ship; James had 
already done so. Here he was! 

Should he use his headlights, or not? He did not know the Palainians' reaction 
to or attitude toward light. It had not occurred to him while at Pluto to ask, 
and it might be important. The landing lights of his vessel might already have 
done his cause irreparable harm. He could drive by starlight if he had to. 

What a town! Virgil Samms had seen the inhabited places of almost every planet 
of Civilization. He had seen cities laid out in circles, sectors, ellipses, 
triangles, squares, parallelopipeds--practically every plan known to geometry. 
He had seen structures of all shapes and sizes--narrow skyscrapers, 
vast-spreading one-stories, polyhedra, domes, spheres, semi-cylinders, and 
erect and inverted full and truncated cones and pyramids. Whatever the plan or 
the shapes of the component units, however, those inhabited places had, without 
exception, been understandable. But this! 

Samms, his eyes now completely dark-accustomed, could see fairly well, but the 
more he saw the less he grasped. There was no plan, no coherence or unity 
whatever. It was as though a cosmic hand had flung a few hundreds of buildings, 
of incredibly and senselessly varied shapes and sizes and architectures, upon 
an otherwise empty plain, and as though each structure had been allowed ever 
since to remain in whatever location and attitude it had chanced to fall. Here 
and there were jumbled piles of three or more utterly incongruous structures. 
There were a few whose arrangement was almost orderly. Here and there were 
large, irregularly-shaped areas of bare, untouched ground. There were no 
streets--at least, nothing that the man could recognize as such. 

Samms headed the creep for one of those open areas, then stopped--declutched 
the tracks, set the brakes, and killed the engines. 

"Go slow, fellow," he advised himself then. "Until you find out what a 
dexitroboper actually does while working at his trade, don't take chances of 
interfering or of doing damage!" 

No Lensman knew--then--that frigid-blooded poison-breathers were not strictly 
three-dimensional; but Samms did know that he had actually seen things which he 
could not understand. He and Kinnison had discussed such occurrences calmly 
enough; but the actuality was enough to shake even the mind of Civilization's 
First Lensman. 

He did not need to be any closer, anyway. Better take turns watching it, hadn't 
we?" asked Seaton. 

It was decided, and while the _Skylark_ was still some distance away, several 
small islands became visible, and the period of rotation of the planet was 
determined to be in the neighborhood of fifty hours. Margaret, then at the 
controls, picked out the largest island visible and directed the bar toward it. 
As they dropped down close to their objective, they found that the air was of 
the same composition as that of Osnome, but had a pressure of seventy-eight 
centimeters of mercury, and that the surface gravity of the planet was 
ninety-five hundredths that of the Earth. 

"Fine business!" exulted Seaton. "Just about like home, but I don't see much of 
any place to land without getting wet, do you? Those reflectors are probably 
solar generators, and they cover the whole island except for that lagoon right 
under us. " 

The island, perhaps ten miles long and half that in width, was entirely covered 
with great parabolic reflectors, arranged so closely together that little could 
be seen between them. Each reflector apparently focussed upon an object in the 
center, a helix which seemed to writhe luridly in that flaming focus, glowing 
with a nacreous, opalescent green light. 

"Well, nothing much to see there--let's go down," remarked Seaton as he shot 
the _Skylark_ over to the edge of the island and down to the surface of the 
water. But here again nothing was to be seen of the land itself. The wall was 
one vertical plate of seamless metal, supporting huge metal guides, between 
which floated metal pontoons. As the catapult's force was spent automatic trips 
upon the undercarriage actuated the propelling rockets and mile after mile, 
with rapidly mounting velocity, the plane sped through the tube. As the exit 
was approached, the tunnel described a long vertical curve, so that when the 
opening into the shaft of the crater was reached and the undercarriage was 
automatically detached, the vessel was projected almost vertically upward. Such 
was its velocity and so powerful was the liquid propellant of its rocket 
motors, that the eye could not follow the flight of the warship as it tore 
through the thin layer of the atmosphere and hurled itself out into the depths 
of space. The pilot then turned on his beams, but found that they were 
ineffective. Both vessels were equipped completely with iron-driven mechanisms; 
both were manned by scientists capable of wringing the highest possible measure 
of power from their installations. Neither could harm the other. 

The _Boise_ flashed away; reached Nevia in minutes. Down into the crimson 
atmosphere she dropped, down toward the city which Costigan knew was Nerado's 
home port. And during all this time the forces of the seven sectors had been 
concentrating. The pilot vessels, with their flaming red screens, each followed 
by a cone of space-ships, drew closer and closer together, approaching the 
_Fearless_--the British super-dreadnought which was to be the flagship of the 
Fleet--the mightiest and heaviest space-ship which had yet lifted her 
stupendous mass into the ether. 

Now, systematically and precisely, the great Cone of Battle was coming into 
being; a formation developed during the Jovian Wars while the forces of the 
Three Planets were fighting in space for their very civilizations' existence, 
and one never used since the last space-fleets of Jupiter's murderous hordes 
had been wiped out. 

The mouth of that enormous hollow cone was a ring of scout patrols, the 
smallest and most agile vessels of the fleet. Behind them came a somewhat 
smaller ring of light cruisers, then rings of heavy cruisers and of light 
battleships, and finally of heavy battleships. At the apex of the cone, 
protected by all the other vessels of the formation and in best position to 
direct the battle, was the flagship. In this formation every vessel was free to 
use her every weapon, with a minimum of danger to her sister ships; and yet, 
when the gigantic main projectors were operated along the axis of the 
formation, from the entire vast circle of the cone's mouth there flamed a 
cylindrical field of force of such intolerable intensity that in it no 
conceivable substance could endure for a moment! 

The artificial planet of metal was now close enough so that it was visible to 
the ultra-vision of the Service men, so plainly visible that the cigar-shaped 
warships of the pirates were seen issuing from the enormous airlocks. As each 
vessel shot out into space it sped straight for the approaching fleet without 
waiting to go into any formation--gray Roger believed his structures invisible 
to Triplanetary eyes, thought that the presence of the fleet was the result of 
mathematical calculations, and was convinced that his mighty vessels of the 
void would destroy even that vast fleet without themselves becoming known. He 
was wrong. . but not to Alpha Centauri, not much to our surprise. " James 
gulped twice; then went on, speaking almost jauntily now that the attempt had 
been made and had failed. "So now it's up to you, Clee, as Director of Project 
Gunther and captain of the good ship _Pleiades_, to boss the more-or-less 
simple--more, I hope--job of getting us back to Tellus. " 



Science, both physical and paraphysical, had done its best. Gunther's Theorems, 
which define the electromagnetic and electrogravitic parameters pertaining to 
the annihilation of distance, had been studied, tested, and applied to the 
full. So had the Psionic Corollaries; which, while not having the status of 
paraphysical laws, do allow computation of the qualities and magnitudes of the 
stresses required for any given application of the Gunther Effect. 

The planning of the starship _Pleiades_ had been difficult in the extreme; its 
construction almost impossible. While it was practically a foregone conclusion 
that any man of the requisite caliber would already be a member of the Galaxian 
Society, the three planets and eight satellites were screened, psionicist by 
psionicist, to select the two strongest and most versatile of their breed. 

These two, Garlock and James, were heads of departments of, and under iron-clad 
contract to, vast Solar System Enterprises, Inc. , the only concern able and 
willing to attempt the building of the first starship. " 



After thinking deeply for a few moments he went on: 

"The idea was taken from your demonstration in the Bureau, either by an 
eye-witness or by someone who heard about it afterward, probably the former. 
Even though it failed, one man saw the possibilities. Who was that man? Who was 
there?" 

"Oh, a lot of the fellows were there. He fell silent as he read the first 
words, and after he had read the entire article he said slowly: 

"True, beyond a doubt. Even a _Clarion_ reporter couldn't imagine that. It 
tells a wild tale of an explosion so violent that science cannot explain it. I 
don't suppose it is true, but it may make interesting reading for you two 
scientific sharps. Good night. " 

Seaton accompanied Dorothy to the car, bidding her a more intimate farewell on 
the way. When he returned, Crane, with an unusual expression of concern on his 
face, handed him the paper without a word. 



"What's up, old man? Something in it?" he asked, as he took the paper. Scott, 
Smith, Penfield, DuQuesne, Roberts--quite a bunch of them. Let's see--Scott 
hasn't brains enough to do anything. Smith doesn't know anything about anything 
except amines. Penfield is a pure scientist, who wouldn't even quote an 
authority without asking permission. DuQuesne is. I have heard of him. " 
Costigan was thinking fast. 

The first result of his thinking was a conference with Temple. As soon as she 
got the drift, she called in Teddy and Big Bill Karns. Be sure that all the 
rises are open--check all the stopes and glory holes--tell everybody you find 
alive to report to me here. . . m. What do you think?" 



James studied Cheswick's mind. "Better than I thought," he decided. "Someone 
will be at the airport to point out to you the already desolated area in which 
the space-ship of the explorers makes its so-frightful landings; Dronvire will 
ask someone to meet you at the airport and bring you to the place of meeting. " 

The telepathic line snapped and Samms turned a white and sweating face to the 
_Chicago's_ captain. 

"God, what a strain! Don't ever try telepathy unless you positively have 
to--especially not with such an outlandishly _different_ race as these 
Rigellians are!" 

"Don't worry; I won't. " Winfield's words were not at all sympathetic, but his 
tone was. "You looked as though somebody was beating your brains out with a 
spiked club. Where next, First Lensman?" 

Samms marked the location of Rigelston upon the vessel's chart, then donned 
ear-plugs and a special, radiation-proof suit of armor, equipped with 
refrigerators and with extra-thick blocks of lead glass to protect the eyes. 

The airport, an extremely busy one well outside the city proper, was located 
easily enough, as was the spot upon which the Tellurian ship was to land. 
Lightly, slowly, she settled downward, her jets raving out against a gravity 
fully twice that of her native Earth. Those blasts, however, added little or 
nothing to the destruction already accomplished by the craft then lying 
there--a torpedo-shaped cruiser having perhaps one-twentieth of the _Chicago's_ 
mass and bulk. 

The superdreadnaught landed, sinking into the hard, dry ground to a depth of 
some ten or fifteen feet before she stopped. Samms, en rapport with the entity 
who was to be his escort, made a flashing survey of the mind so intimately in 
contact with his own. No use. As he had expected, they were prepared for that. 
And, unlike her sister-ship, she was manned by scientists well versed in the 
fundamental theory of the weapons with which they fought. Beams, rods, and 
lances of energy flamed and flared; planes and pencils cut, slashed, and 
stabbed; defensive screens glowed redly or flashed suddenly into intensely 
brilliant, coruscating incandescence. Crimson opacity struggled sullenly 
against violet curtain of annihilation. Material projectiles and torpedoes were 
launched under full beam control; only to be exploded harmlessly in mid-space, 
to be blasted into nothingness, or to disappear innocuously against 
impenetrable polycyclic screens. Even Cleveland's drill was ineffective. So 
closely was the creature wrapped around the submarine that his weapons could 
not be brought to bear upon it. 

"What can it possibly be, anyway, and what can we do about it?" Clio asked. 

"I've been going to school for the last few weeks," Costigan grinned, "and I've 
picked up quite a few things here and there--literally, as well as 
figuratively. Snap it up, guys! Our armor is stored with the pieces of the 
pirates' lifeboat, and I'll feel a lot better when we've got it on and have 
hold of a few Lewistons. " 

They hurried down corridors, up ramps, and along hallways, with Costigan's 
spy-ray investigating the course ahead for chance Nevians. Bradley and Clio 
were unarmed, but the operative had found a piece of flat metal and had ground 
it to a razor edge. " 

"All right, go on. . I guess. I'd like to drag in the pieces of that ship, 
too--his instruments and a lot of the parts could be used. " 

"Why not do it all at once?" suggested Crane. "We can start that whole mass 
toward Osnome by drawing it behind us until such a velocity has been attained 
that it will reach there at the desired time. We could then go to 'X,' and 
overtake this material near the green system. " 

"Right you are, ace--that's a sound idea. But say, Dunark, it wouldn't be good 
technique for you to eat our food for any length of time. While we're figuring 
this out you'd better hop over there and bring over enough to last you two 
until we get you home. Give it to Shiro--after a couple of lessons, you'll find 
he'll be as good as any of your cooks. " 



Faster and faster the _Skylark_ flew, pulling behind her the mass of wreckage, 
held by every available attractor. When the calculated velocity had been 
attained, the attractors were shut off and the vessel darted away toward that 
planet, still in the Carboniferous Age, which possessed at least one solid 
ledge of metallic "X," the rarest of all earthly metals. As the automatic 
controls held the cruiser upon her course, the six wanderers sat long in 
discussion as to what should be done, what could be done, to avert the 
threatened destruction of all the civilization of the Galaxy except the 
monstrous and unspeakable culture of the Fenachrone. So, Skandos One removed 
the clothing from the Lady Rhoann and after one look, Lord Tedric did the rest! 



_Skandos One (The Skandos of Time Track Number One, numbered for reasons which 
will become clear) showed, by means of the chronoviagraph, that civilization 
would destroy itself in one hundred eighty-seven years. To prevent this 
catastrophe he went back to the key point in time and sought out the key 
figure--one Tedric, a Lomarrian ironmaster who had lived and died a commoner; 
unable, ever, to do anything about his fanatical detestation of human 
sacrifice. _ 

_Skandos One taught Tedric how to make one batch of super-steel; watched him 
forge armor and arms from that highly anachronistic alloy. He watched him do 
things that Tedric of Time Track One had never done. He must have been saved by 
his "traction" on the reality of Time Track Two. He'd snap back up to his own 
time and see what the situation was. If he found his assistant Furmin alone in 
the laboratory, the extremists would have been proved wrong. If not. . . . . " 

"Oh, no, Conway--no! Don't let them!" Clio was sobbing openly. "I'm going to my 
room and crawl under the bed--I'll see that sight all the rest of my life!" 

"Steady, Clio. " Costigan's arm tightened around her. 

"I know it, sweetheart, and I would like nothing better in the world than to be 
married today and take our honeymoon in the Skylark, but I can't do it. After 
we come back from the first long trip we will be married just as soon as you 
say ready, and after that we will always be together wherever I go. No top 
appointments and no authority. For the wonderful crystal goblets were filled 
with a grayish-green slime of a nauseous and over-powering odor, the smaller 
bowls were full of living sea spiders and other such delicacies; and each large 
platter contained a fish fully a foot long, raw and whole, garnished tastefully 
with red, purple, and green strands of seaweed! 

Clio looked once, then gasped, shutting her eyes and turning away from the 
table, but Costigan flipped the three fish into a platter and set it aside 
before he turned back to the visiplate. 

"They'll go good fried," he remarked to Bradley, signaling vigorously to Nerado 
that the meal was not acceptable and that he wanted to talk to him, _in 
person_. Finally he made himself clear, the table sank down out of sight, and 
the Nevian commander cautiously entered the room. 

At Costigan's insistence, he came up to the visiplate, leaving near the door 
three alert and fully-armed guards. The man then shot the beam into the galley 
of the pirate's lifeboat, suggesting that they should be allowed to live there. 
I'll give you part of the credit. . . . . It _could_ be done, and it would 
probably work, but I would not recommend it except as an ultimately last 
resort. " 

"I say do it first, then we know we will get results. I tell you I'm afraid of 
pussyfooting and gumshoeing around Seaton and Crane. I used to think that 
Seaton was easy, but he seems to have developed greatly in the last few weeks, 
and Crane never was anybody's fool. Together they make a combination hard to 
beat. Brute force, applied without warning, is our best bet, and there's no 
danger, you know that. We've got away clean with lots worse stuff. Merely 
another relay. " 

"Oh. . maybe," James admitted. 

"So why don't you, Fao and Deggi, put Jim in charge of construction?" 

Fao threw back her silvery head and glared, but Delcamp jumped at the chance. 
"Would you, Jim?" 

"Sure--unless Miss Talaho objects. " 

"She won't. " The man grinned venomously. "Nobody who knows you will get close 
enough to her to tell the difference. This wasn't done on the spur of the 
moment, Jill; it was planned--minutely. You haven't got the chance of the 
proverbial celluloid dog in hell. " 

"Jill!" Jack Kinnison's thought stabbed in. "It isn't Rushton--fourteen 
seventy-nine is a two-story. What other streets could it be?" 

"I don't know. . I see. " 

Then silence; and waiting. Minutes? Or days? Or weeks? Who can tell? What does 
time mean to any Arisian? 

Then Drounli arrived; arrived in the instant of his leaving The Hill--what 
matters even inter-galactic distance to the speed of thought? He fused his mind 
with those of the three other Molders of Civilization. The massed and united 
mind of Arisia, poised and ready, awaiting only his coming, launched itself 
through space. That tremendous, that theretofore unknown concentration of 
mental force arrived at Eddore's outer screen in practically the same instant 
as did the entity that was Gharlane. The Eddorian, however, went through 
without opposition; the Arisians did not. 



Some two thousand million years ago, when the Coalescence occurred--the event 
which was to make each of the two interpassing galaxies teem with planets--the 
Arisians were already an ancient race; so ancient that they were even then 
independent of the chance formation of planets. The Eddorians, it is believed, 
were older still. The Arisians were native to this, our normal space-time 
continuum; the Eddorians were not. 

Eddore was--and is--huge, dense, and hot. Its atmosphere is not air, as we of 
small, green Terra, know air, but is a noxious mixture of gaseous substances 
known to mankind only in chemical laboratories. Its hydrosphere, while it does 
contain some water, is a poisonous, stinking, foully corrosive, slimy and 
sludgy liquid. 

And the Eddorians were as different from any people we know as Eddore is 
different from the planets indigenous to our space and time. They were, to our 
senses, utterly monstrous; almost incomprehensible. They were amorphous, 
amoeboid, sexless. Not androgynous or parthenogenetic, but absolutely sexless; 
with a sexlessness unknown in any Earthly form of life higher than the yeasts. 
Thus they were, to all intents and purposes and except for death by violence, 
immortal; for each one, after having lived for hundreds of thousands of 
Tellurian years and having reached its capacity to live and to learn, simply 
divided into two new individuals, each of which, in addition to possessing in 
full its parent's mind and memories and knowledges, had also a brand-new zest 
and a greatly increased capacity. 

And, since life was, there had been competition. Knowledge was worth while only 
insofar as it contributed to power. Warfare began, and aged, and continued; the 
appallingly efficient warfare possible only to such entities as those. Their 
minds, already immensely powerful, grew stronger and stronger under the 
stresses of inter-necine struggle. 

But peace was not even thought of. " 

Back and back went Gharlane's mind. Centuries. . . . . . . . or _are_ you sold, 
actually?" 

"Actually. Honestly. That Arisian was a thousand times more of a woman than I 
ever will be, and she didn't wear a Lens--never had worn one. Women's minds and 
Lenses don't fit. There's a sex-based incompatibility. Lenses are as masculine 
as whiskers--and at that, only a very few men can ever wear them, either. Very 
special men, like you three and Dad and Pops Kinnison. . " 

"I wasn't thinking so much of bombs. We know that Uighar's super-sonic jobs are 
ready. We don't know exactly what Norheim has, since they cut my Intelligence 
line a while back, but I'm sending over another operative--my best man, 
too--tonight. If he finds out that we have enough advantage in speed, and I'm 
pretty sure that we have, I say hit both Norheim and Uighar right then, while 
we can, before they hit us. And hit them hard--pulverize them. Then set up a 
world government strong enough to knock out any nation--including 
Atlantis--that will not cooperate with it. This course of action is flagrantly 
against all international law and all the principles of democracy, I know; and 
even it might not work. It is, however, as far as I can see, the only course 
which _can_ work. " 

"You--we all--perceive its weaknesses. " The Faros thought for minutes. 

"Reporting for orders, sir. " He saluted the Officer punctiliously. 

"At ease, sir. " Artomenes returned the salute. "You were called here for a 
word from the Faros. 

"Reporting for orders, sir. " He saluted the Officer punctiliously. 

"At ease, sir. " Artomenes returned the salute. "You were called here for a 
word from the Faros. "You cannot be sure that your Intelligence has located all 
of the danger points, and many of them must be so far underground as to be safe 
from even our heaviest missiles. We all, including you, believe that the 
Psychologist is right in holding that the reaction of the other nations to such 
action would be both unfavorable and violent. Your report, please, Talmonides. 
" 

"I have already put my data into the integrator. " The Psychologist punched a 
button and the mechanism began to whir and to click. "I have only one new fact 
of any importance; the name of one of the higher-ups and its corollary 
implication that there may be some degree of cooperation between Norheim and 
Uighar. . . it'll take about eleven months?" 

"Just about," Jones agreed, and Adams nodded. 

"Well, if that's what the cards say, there's no use yowling about it," and all 
nine survivors went to work. We've got to do just that. " 

The course alarm sounded, and they saw that a planet lay directly in their 
path. It was "X," and enough negative acceleration was applied to make an easy 
landing possible. 

"Isn't it going to be a long, slow job, chopping off two tons of that metal and 
fighting away those terrible animals besides?" asked Margaret. 

"It'll take about a millionth of a second, Peg. I'm going to bite it off with 
the zone, just as I took that bite out of our field. The rotation of the planet 
will throw us away from the surface, then we'll release the zone and drag our 
prey off with us. It was all too plentiful, and twenty times the drama was 
reenacted before approaching day made it necessary for Czuv to take the 
controls and dive the vessel into the westermost landing-shaft of Zbardk. A 
rousing and enthusiastic welcome awaited them, and joy spread rapidly when 
their success became known. 

"Now we know what to do, and we had better do it immediately, before they get 
our system figured out and increase their own power. She came back presently 
with a look of concern upon her face. " 

Damnation! There it was again! First "dexitroboping", and now this! 

"One moment, please," Samms requested. "I fail to grasp the meaning of your 
thought. " 

"So I perceive. The fault is of course mine, in not being able to attune my 
mind fully to yours. Do not take this, please, as any aspersion upon the 
character or strength of your own mind. " 

"Of course not. . the oil-drum of a body, the four blocky legs, the 
multi-branchiate tentacular arms, that immobile dome of a head, the complete 
lack of eyes and of ears. . . . . . Hello, Sid; mighty glad to see you--we were 
scared for a while. How did you make out, and what was it?" 

"Hi, Chief! Mostly hadive. Some heroin, and quite a bit of Martian ladolian. 
Lousy job, though--three of the gang got away, and took about a quarter of the 
loot with them. That was what I want to talk to you about in such a hurry--fake 
meteors; the first I ever saw. " 

Samms straightened up in his chair. "Look there--I thought I saw something 
move--it _is_ moving!" 

"There's something moving closer than that, and it's really funny. " Jack 
laughed deeply. "Its like the paddle-wheels, shaft and all, of an old-fashioned 
river steam-boat, rolling along as unconcernedly as you please. He won't miss 
me by over four feet, but he isn't swerving a hair. I think I'll block him off, 
just to see what he does. " 

"Be careful, Jack!" Samms cautioned, sharply. "Don't touch it--it may be 
charged, or worse. " 

Jack took the metal cover, which he was still holding, and by working it back 
and forth edgewise in the sand, made of it a vertical barrier squarely across 
the thing's path. The traveler paid no attention, did not alter its steady pace 
of a couple of miles per hour. It measured about twelve inches long over all; 
its paddle-wheel-like extremities were perhaps two inches wide and three inches 
in diameter. 

"Do you think it's actually _alive_, sir? In a place like this?" 

"I'm sure of it. Watch carefully. " 

It struck the barrier and stopped. That is, its forward motion stopped, but its 
rolling did not. Its rate of revolution did not change; it either did not know 
or did not care that its drivers were slipping on the smooth, hard sand; that 
it could not climb the vertical metal plate; that it was not getting anywhere. 

"What a brain!" Northrop chortled, squatting down closer. "Why doesn't it back 
up or turn around? It may be alive, but it certainly isn't very bright. " 

The creature, now in the shadow of the 'Troncist's helmet, slowed down 
abruptly--went limp--collapsed. 

"Get out of his light!" Jack snapped, and pushed his friend violently away; and 
as the vicious sunlight struck it, the native revived and began to revolve as 
vigorously as before. "I've got a hunch. Larry, please ask Teddy Blake's Oman 
to bring her in here. . but maybe long enough, at that--the Patrol globe was 
leaking like a sieve! He voiced a couple of bursts of deep-space profanity and, 
although he was almost afraid to look, sneaked a quick peek to see how much was 
left of the Hill. He looked--and stopped swearing in the middle of a 
four-letter Anglo-Saxon word. 

What he saw simply did not make sense. But she is Virgil Samms' daughter. " 

"Good night, Daddy dear," she replied, throwing her arms around his neck. "I 
have the finest Dad a girl ever had, and the finest. . . . " Diamond-hard eyes 
glared balefully at the urge of thoughts to a clean and normal mind 
unthinkable. 

"To your posts," he ordered. "The machines will continue to function under 
their automatic controls during the short time it will require to abate this 
nuisance. " 

"One moment!" A strange voice roared from the speakers. "Consider yourselves 
under arrest, by order of the Triplanetary Council! Surrender and you shall 
receive impartial hearing; fight us and you shall never come to trial. From 
what we have learned of Roger, we do not expect him to surrender, but if any of 
you other men wish to avoid immediate death, leave your vessel at once. I'm not 
fighting you. I never will. . . . . " 

"What does _that_ mean?" Entlore asked, dark foreboding in his mind. 

"I was afraid of that. They were already blanketing every frequency he could 
employ; using power through which he could not drive even a tight beam a 
hundred miles. 

But he could still crash that missile in its tube. Or--could he? He was not 
afraid of other Norheiman fighters; he had a long lead and he rode one of their 
very fastest. But since they were already so suspicious, wouldn't they launch 
the bomb _before_ seven o'clock? He tried vainly to coax another knot out of 
his wide-open engines. 

With all his speed, he neared the pin-point just in time to see a trail of 
super-heated vapor extending up into and disappearing beyond the stratosphere. 
He nosed his flyer upward, locked the missile into his sights, and leveled off. 
Although his ship did not have the giant rocket's acceleration, he could catch 
it before it got to Atlantis, since he did not need its altitude and since most 
of its journey would be made without power. What he could do about it after he 
caught it he did not know, but he'd do _something_. Shall we go eat?" 

"Uh-huh--let's. " 

They joined Lola and James at the table; and if Lola noticed anything out of 
the ordinary, she made no sign. 

And after breakfast, in the Main-- 

"About three weeks, Jim, you think?" Garlock asked. 

"Give or take a couple of days, yes. I don't want him ever to look at me that 
way again, to say nothing of what else he might do, while I'm alive. I have no 
consciousness of self nor any desire for continued existence. To do so, 
however, would. . . my men are _spacemen_, mister. " 

Laro spoke up. Were books or records left on Ardry by the race you call the 
Masters?" 

"You know there are, Master. They are exactly as you left them. He walked 
straight on, toward the business center, to resume his study at the point where 
he had left off the evening before. Through the holes in the still-glowing 
walls, hexan soldiery were leaping in steady streams, fighting with the utmost 
savagery of their bloodthirsty natures, urged on by the desperation born of the 
knowledge of imminent defeat and total destruction. Hand-weapons roared, 
flashed, and sparkled; heavy bars crashed and thudded against crunching bones; 
mighty bodies and tails whipped crushingly about six-limbed forms which 
wrenched and tore with monstrously powerful hands and claws. Fiercely and 
valiantly the Vorkuls fought, but they were outnumbered by hundreds and only 
one outcome was possible. 

Kromodeor was one of the last to go down. One hand upon each of the several 
dials and one eye upon each meter, it was a matter only of seconds for him to 
get in touch with Vorkulia. To the Terrestrials the screen was a gray and foggy 
blank; but the manifest excitement shrieking and whistling from the speaker in 
response to Kromodeor's signals made it plain that his message was being 
received with enthusiasm. 

"They are coming," the Vorkul thought, and lay back, exhausted. 

"Just as well that they're comin' out here, at that," Brandon commented. "We 
couldn't begin to handle that structure anywhere near Jupiter--in fact, we 
wouldn't want to get very close ourselves, with passengers aboard. " 

Such was the power of the Vorkulian vessels that in less than twenty hours 
another heptagon slowed to a halt beside the _Sirius_ and two of its crew were 
wafted aboard. 

They were ushered into the Venerian room, where they talked briefly with their 
wounded fellow before they dressed him in a space-suit, which they filled with 
air to their own pressure. Then all three were lifted lightly into the air, and 
without a word or a sign were borne through the air-locks of the vessel, and 
into an opening in the wall of the rescuing heptagon. A green tractor beam 
reached out, seizing the derelict, and both structures darted away at such a 
pace that in a few minutes they had disappeared in the black depths of space. 

"Well--that, as I may have remarked before, is indisputably and conclusively 
that. " Brandon broke the surprised, almost stunned, silence that followed the 
unceremonious departure of the visitors. "I don't know whether to feel relieved 
at the knowledge that they won't bother us, or whether to get mad because they 
won't have anything to do with us. " 

He sent the "All x" signal to the pilot and the _Sirius_, once more at the 
acceleration of Terrestrial gravity, again bored on through space. 









Spacehounds Triumphant 



Now that the hexan threat that had so long oppressed the humanity of the 
_Sirius_ was lifted, that dull gray football of armor steel was filled with 
relief and rejoicing as the pilot laid his course for Europa. Lounges and 
saloons resounded with noise as police, passengers, and such of the crew as 
were at liberty made merry. The control room, in which were grouped the leaders 
of the expedition and the scientists, was orderly enough, but a noticeable 
undertone of gladness had replaced the tense air it had known so long. 

"Hi, men!" Nadia Stevens and Verna Pickering, arms around each other's waists, 
entered the room and saluted the group gaily before they became a part of it. 

"'Smatter, girls--tired of dancing already?" asked Brandon. 

"Oh, no--we could dance from now on," Verna assured him. "But you see, Nadia 
hadn't seen that husband of hers for fifteen minutes, and was getting lonesome. 
Being afraid of all you men, she wanted me to come along for moral support. The 
real reason I came, though," and she narrowed her expressive eyes and lowered 
her voice mysteriously, "is that you two physicists are here. I want to study 
my chosen victims a little longer before I decide over which of you to cast the 
spell of my fatal charm. " 

"But you can't do that," he objected, vigorously. "Quince and I are going to 
settle that ourselves some day--by shooting dice, or maybe each other, or. . . 
. . . . " 

"Huh?" he demanded. "_You_ should scream--oh, that ridiculous Tellurian prud. . 
. . . well, they are strictly analogous to the severed ends of the hairs, every 
time you get a haircut. " 

"My God!" Hilton stared at Sawtelle. Sawtelle stared back. "I'm beginning to 
see. . . " Her voice ceased as Roger broke the ether-wall of her apartment and 
walked toward the divan, upon which she crouched in wide-eyed, helpless, 
trembling terror. 

"Get ready, Bradley!" Costigan directed tersely. "He left Clio's ether-wall 
off, so that any abnormal signals would be relayed to him from his desk--he 
knows that there's no chance of anyone disturbing him in that room. But I'm 
holding a beam on that switch, so that the wall is on, full strength. No. If 
sobeit sacrifice is done I intend to marry, some day, and have six or eight 
children. But. . " 

"Wouldn't there be three? Witherspoon?" 

"I doubt it. My present idea is that Witherspoon is at least one level lower. 
Comparatively small fry. " 

"Could be--I'll buy it. A nice picture, Virge; and beautifully symmetrical. His 
Mightiness Morgan. Secretary of War Towne and Secretary of Drugs Isaacson; and 
each of them putting a heavy shoulder behind the political bandwagon. _Very_ 
nice. The job isn't worth it--yet. " 

"Don't worry, Dad. It may take a week or it may take a year, but we'll bring 
her back," and leaping upon his motorcycle, he shattered all the speed laws on 
his way to Crane's house. 

"Mart!" he yelled, rushing into the shop, "they've got Dottie, in a bus made 
from our plans. Let's go!" as he started on a run for the testing shed. 

"Wait a minute!" crisply shouted Crane. "Dick, what shall we do with this 
murderer?" 

Seaton had forgotten DuQuesne utterly in the joy of holding his sweetheart in 
his arms, but at his friend's words, he faced about and his face grew stern. 

"By rights, we ought to chuck him back into his own tub and let him go to the 
devil," he said savagely, doubling his fists and turning swiftly. 

"No, no, Dick," remonstrated Dorothy, seizing his arm. His protests against 
Seaton's incessant work had no effect. Seaton insisted that he _must_ fix 
firmly just a few more points before they eluded him, and stuck doggedly to his 
task. There he engaged a fast car and set out in pursuit, choosing the path for 
the chauffeur by means of the compass. His search ended at the residence of 
Brookings, the General Manager of the great World Steel Corporation. Here he 
dismissed the car and watched the house while his assistant went to bring out 
the fast motorcycle used by Prescott when high speed was desirable. 

After four hours a small car bearing the license number of a distant 
state--which was found, by subsequent telegraphing, to be unknown to the 
authorities of that state--drove under the porte-cochère, and the hidden 
watcher saw DuQuesne, without the papers, step into it. Knowing now what to 
expect, Prescott drove his racing motorcycle at full speed out to the Park Road 
Bridge and concealed himself beneath the structure, in a position commanding a 
view of the concrete abutment through which the scientist must have come. Soon 
he heard a car slow down overhead, heard a few rapid footfalls, and saw the 
dark form of a large man outlined against the gray face of the abutment. He saw 
the man lift his hand high above his head, and saw a black rectangle appear in 
the gray, engulf the man, and disappear. After a few minutes he approached the 
abutment and searched its face with the help of his flash-light. He finally 
succeeded in tracing the almost imperceptible crack which outlined the door, 
and the concealed button which DuQuesne had pressed to open it. 

And Jack Kinnison, lounging idly and elegantly in the concourse of Danopolis 
Spaceport, seethed imperceptibly. Having swallowed a tiny Service Special 
capsule that morning, he knew that he had been under continuous spy-ray 
inspection for over two hours. He had not given himself away--practically 
everybody screened their inside coat pockets and hip pockets, and the 
cat-whisker lead from Lens to leg simply could not be seen--but for all the 
good they were doing him his ultra-instruments might just as well have been 
back on Tellus. 

"Mase!" he sent, with no change whatever in the vapid expression then on his 
face. "I'm still covered. Since you have taken it upon yourself to exceed your 
authority to such an extent as to refuse to connect the officer in command of 
the _Pleiades_ with the Chancellor, I cannot report to him either the reasons 
why we are not landing at this time or when we expect to return to Tellus. You 
are advised that we may leave at any instant, just like that!" Belle snapped 
her finger under the imaged nose. All of you can see me very much better within 
your own minds. 

"I am not here as an invader in any sense, but only as a citizen of the First 
Galaxy of this, our common universe. I have attuned my mind to each of yours in 
order to give you a message from the United Galaxian Societies. 

"There are four of us Galaxians in this Exploration Team. As Galaxians it is 
our purpose here and our duty here to open your minds to certain basic truths, 
to be of help to you in clearing your minds of fallacies, of lies, and of 
undefensible prejudices; to the end that you will more rapidly become Galaxians 
yourselves. . " 

"Clam it, ace!" Stevens interrupted. "I get you, to nineteen decimals. And you 
don't half know just what a good kid she really is. She's the reason we're 
here--we were down pretty close to bed-rock for a while, she stood up when I 
wilted. She's got everything. . . . . . . . " 

"How come they let you?" asked Clio. 

"Oh, Conway, this is ghastly! It's. . that is, he. Whenever we land on any 
planet for the first time, one of us has to control it. Or for any other 
special job not in its memory banks. When you're ready for us to land I'll show 
you--it's my turn to work. " 

"Miss Flurnoy, have they cleared the air over Pylon Six?" 

"Yes, sir. Clearance came through five minutes ago. They are holding it clear 
for us. " 

"Thank you. Deliver me from _two_ such pretzel-benders aboard one ship. " 

". . . nine hundred forty. 

The Blacks were not as fortunate. The _Chicago_, now without a partner, joined 
beams with the _Bolivar_ and the _Himalaya_ against Number Two; then, a short 
half-second later, with her other two sister-ships against Number Three. And in 
that very short space of time two Black super-dreadnaughts ceased utterly to 
be. Their massed batteries of beams, precisely synchronized and aimed, lashed 
out as one at the nearest Patrol super heavy, the _Boise_. Under the vicious 
power of that beautifully-timed thrust that warship's first, second, and third 
screens, her very wall-shield, flared through the spectrum and into the black. 
Her Chief Pilot, however, was fast--_very_ fast--and he had a fraction of a 
second in which to work. Thus, practically in the instant of her wall-shield's 
failure, she went free; and while she was holed badly and put out of action, 
she was not blown out of space. In fact, it was learned later that she lost 
only forty men. 

The Blacks were not as fortunate. The _Chicago_, now without a partner, joined 
beams with the _Bolivar_ and the _Himalaya_ against Number Two; then, a short 
half-second later, with her other two sister-ships against Number Three. And in 
that very short space of time two Black super-dreadnaughts ceased utterly to 
be. The _Boise_ stayed "up on top"; the _Chicago_ went down. Kinnison, however, 
paid very little attention to the landing or to Samms' disembarkation, and none 
whatever to the _Chicago's_ reascent into the high heavens. He knew that 
everything was under control; and, now alone in his cabin, he was busy. 

"All personnel of all armed forces just inducted into the Galactic Patrol, 
attention!" He spoke into an ultra-wave microphone, the familiar parade-ground 
rasp very evident in his deep and resonant voice. "Kinnison of Tellus, Port 
Admiral, speaking. " 

"Tug, Uncle Ralph. The casts sectioned just like we thought they would. Dead 
ringers for Plate D. So Drake hung a red ticket on every tray. " Kinnison 
grinned to himself, at something which the young people could not see. He 
doesn't think that it can be a foreign country. He has their agents pretty well 
spotted, and the only one that could fill the bill--you know a man with that 
description and with the cold nerve to do the job would be apt to be known--was 
in San Francisco, the time this job was pulled off. " 



"The more you talk, the more I am convinced that it was DuQuesne himself," 
declared Seaton, positively. "He is almost exactly my size and build, is the 
only man I know of who could do anything with the solution after he got it, and 
he has nerve enough to do anything. " 

"I would like to think it was DuQuesne," replied the detective, thoughtfully, 
"but I'm afraid we'll have to count him out of it entirely. He has been under 
the constant surveillance of my best men ever since you mentioned him. We have 
detectaphones in his rooms, wires on his telephone, and are watching him night 
and day. He never goes out except to work, never has any except unimportant 
telephone calls, and the instruments register only the occasional scratching of 
a match, the rustle of papers, and other noises of a man studying. He's 
innocent. " 

"That may be true," assented Seaton doubtfully, "but you want to remember that 
he knows more about electricity than the guy that invented it, and I'm not sure 
that he can't talk to a detectaphone and make it say anything he wants it to. 
Anyway, we can soon settle it. " 

"I certainly won't try to, then. But for my money, you are people," Hilton 
said, and Karns agreed. " 

James showed her; and, much to her surprise, she found it very easy to do. 



The vessels transporting the invading forces were huge, spherical shells 
equipped with short-range drives--and with nothing else. No accommodations, no 
facilities, no food, no water, not even any air. Each transport, when filled to 
the bursting-point with as-yet-docile cargo, darted away; swinging around to 
approach Clamer from some previously-assigned direction. It did not, however, 
approach the planet's surface. At about two thousand miles out, great ports 
opened and the load was dumped out into space, to fall the rest of the way by 
gravity. Then the empty shell, with only its one pilot aboard, rushed back for 
another load. 

"How heavy shots, Clee?" James asked. He and Lola were getting into their 
scanners. "Wouldn't take as much as a kiloton equivalent, would it?" 

"Half a kilo is plenty, but no use being too fussy about precision out here. " 



Garlock and Belle were already bombing; James and Lola began. Slow and awkward 
at first, Lola soon picked up the technique and was firing blast for blast with 
the others. No more loaded transport vessels left the moon. No empty one, 
returning toward the moon, reached there. " 

"Not in this life. If they tried to follow us, they're both dead before now. 
Fair enough?" 

"Fair enough. We're apt to need any number of specialists. 

This building, an exact duplicate of the old one, was located on a mesa in the 
foothills southwest of the natatorium, in a luxuriant grove at sight of which 
Karns stopped and began to laugh. 

"I thought I'd seen everything," he remarked. "But yellow pine, spruce, 
tamarack, apples, oaks, palms, oranges, cedars, joshua trees and _cactus_--just 
to name a few--all growing on the same quarter-section of land?" 

"Just everything anybody wants, is all," Hilton said. "But are they really 
growing? Or just straight synthetics? Lane--Kathy--this is your dish. " 

"Not so fast, Jarve; give us a chance, _please_!" Kathryn, now Mrs. Lane 
Saunders, pleaded. She shook her spectacular head. "We don't see how any stable 
indigenous life can have developed at all, unless. . 
