. He began to cry. He’s the man. 

--O certainly, said the director. IVORY, IVOIRE, AVORIO, EBUR. One of the first 
examples that he had learnt in Latin had run: INDIA MITTIT EBUR; and he 
recalled the shrewd northern face of the rector who had taught him to construe 
the Metamorphoses of Ovid in a courtly English, made whimsical by the mention 
of porkers and potsherds and chines of bacon. 

Perhaps she had not told him all the story. And how cold and slimy the water 
had been! And a fellow had once seen a big rat jump plop into the scum. 

--Here I am, said Stephen, halting and glancing from Heron to his friend. I 
have. Lest I should betray my agitation I delayed a few moments pretending to 
fix my shoe properly and then, saying that I was obliged to go, I bade him 
good-day. 

Stephen shook his head and smiled in his rival's flushed and mobile face, 
beaked like a bird's. He walked towards us very slowly, always tapping the 
ground with his stick, so slowly that I thought he was looking for something in 
the grass. He asked in a suspicious provincial accent: 

“Who is the man? What’s his name and address?” 

A young man in a cycling-suit cleared his way through the ring of bystanders. 
He could not touch him for more than a bob--and a bob was no use. 

Cranly gripped his arm tightly to check his tongue, smiling uneasily, and 
repeated: 

--Easy, easy, easy! 

Temple struggled to free his arm but continued, his mouth flecked by a thin 
foam: 

--Socialism was founded by an Irishman and the first man in Europe who preached 
the freedom of thought was Collins. Two penitents rose and entered the 
confessional at either side. 

P. “Did you never hear that? And the men used to go in on Sunday morning 
before the houses were open to buy a waistcoat or a trousers--moya! But Tricky 
Dicky’s little old father always had a tricky little black bottle up in a 
corner. God and the Blessed Virgin were too far from him: God was too great and 
stern and the Blessed Virgin too pure and holy. 

--And here's the wiseacre, said Temple. 

The next day brought death and judgement, stirring his soul slowly from its 
listless despair. I'll stand you a pint after. ” 

“Faith, Mr Henchy,” said the old man, “you’d keep up better style than 
some of them. He had told me stories about the catacombs and about Napoleon 
Bonaparte, and he had explained to me the meaning of the different ceremonies 
of the Mass and of the different vestments worn by the priest. 

Went to library. That's no way to send for one of the senior boys. Villona was 
entertaining also--a brilliant pianist--but, unfortunately, very poor. Once or 
twice I stopped by the way under a bush to redden my pipe and only for the dew 
was thick I'd have stretched out there and slept. I tried to make him someway 
decent. What did that mean about the smugging in the square? Why did the five 
fellows out of the higher line run away for that? It was a joke, he thought. A 
game of swans flew there and the water and the shore beneath were fouled with 
their green-white slime. Stephen felt the skin tingle and glow slightly and 
almost painlessly; and, bowing submissively, as if to meet his companion's 
jesting mood, began to recite the CONFITEOR. Royal persons, favourites, 
intriguers, bishops, passed like mute phantoms behind their veil of names. That 
has the true scholastic stink. Our flesh shrinks from what it dreads and 
responds to the stimulus of what it desires by a purely reflex action of the 
nervous system. Second arts, too. You know I'm a member of the field club. 
Saint Thomas, the greatest doctor of the church, the angelic doctor, as he is 
called, says that the worst damnation consists in this, that the understanding 
of man is totally deprived of divine light and his affection obstinately turned 
away from the goodness of God. ” 

“Why didn’t you remind him?” said Mr O’Connor. HE THAT WILL NOT HEAR 
THE CHURCHA LET HIM BE TO THEEA AS THE HEATHENA AND THE PUBLICANA. ” 

As the subject had grown lugubrious it was buried in a silence of the table 
during which Mrs Malins could be heard saying to her neighbour in an indistinct 
undertone: 

“They are very good men, the monks, very pious men. 

All this time the dressing-room was a hive of excitement. It was a mild sunny 
morning in the first week of June. _ 

He paused. 

They had to go visiting together and, as he had not answered her, Miss 

“Of course, you’ve no answer. . But the astonishing thing is this. 

The porter led them along a corridor and opened a door. The fellows said it was 
made of whalebone and leather with lead inside: and he wondered what was the 
pain like. Aubrey was at school and had only an hour or two free in the 
evening. He cursed his want of money and cursed all the rounds he had stood, 
particularly all the whiskies and Apollinaris which he had stood to Weathers. 
Now and again a tram was heard swishing along the lonely road outside. Air, 
musty from having been long enclosed, hung in all the rooms, and the waste room 
behind the kitchen was littered with old useless papers. Then all his eagerness 
passed away and he felt his face quite cool. Mr M’Coy, who wanted to enter 
the conversation by any door, pretended that he had never heard the story. They 
cry unto the night their battle-name: I moan in sleep when I hear afar their 
whirling laughter. He wished then to go to China to win still more souls for 
God but he died of fever on the island of Sancian. He rolled its body, tender 
yet brittle as a grain of rice, between thumb and finger for an instant before 
he let it fall from him and wondered would it live or die. Then he asked 
Fleming and Fleming said that the word had no plural. He knew that he would 
have to speak a great deal, to invent and to amuse, and his brain and throat 
were too dry for such a task. The adventure of meeting Gallaher after eight 
years, of finding himself with Gallaher in Corless’s surrounded by lights and 
noise, of listening to Gallaher’s stories and of sharing for a brief space 
Gallaher’s vagrant and triumphant life, upset the equipoise of his sensitive 
nature. 

--And yet what I have said as to the strength and quality and boundlessness of 
this fire is as nothing when compared to its intensity, an intensity which it 
has as being the instrument chosen by divine design for the punishment of soul 
and body alike. Come, my beloved, where I may Speak to your heart. ” 

“O do, Mary Jane,” said Aunt Kate. One time I hear you talk against English 
literature. 

APRIL 15. They tried to keep up with him, smiling also at his eagerness. ” 

“O, now, Mrs Kernan,” said Mr Power, “we’ll make him turn over a new 
leaf. Old father, old artificer, stand me now and ever in good stead. One 
evening his father came home full of news which kept his tongue busy all 
through dinner. One fellow had a good voice, another fellow was a good actor, 
another could sing a good comic song, another was a good oarsman or a good 
racket player, another could tell a good story and so on. 

He sat in a corner of the playroom pretending to watch a game of dominoes and 
once or twice he was able to hear for an instant the little song of the gas. He 
spoke without listening to the speech of his companions. You are McGlade's 
suck. ” 

“To take a pick itself,” said Mary Jane, “after all your dancing. ” 

“Allow me,” said Mr Cunningham positively, “it was _Lux upon Lux_. He 
wanted to be held firmly in her arms, to be caressed slowly, slowly, slowly. 
She had tried to make him ridiculous before people, heckling him and staring at 
him with her rabbit’s eyes. The ends of her tulle collarette had been 
carefully disordered and a big bunch of red flowers was pinned in her bosom, 
stems upwards. Then with a grave gesture he extended a hand towards the light 
and, smiling, opened it slowly to the gaze of his disciple. He could not see 
her face but he could see the terracotta and salmon-pink panels of her skirt 
which the shadow made appear black and white. He scarcely resented what had 
seemed to him a silly indelicateness for he knew that the adventure in his mind 
stood in no danger from these words: and his face mirrored his rival's false 
smile. It was the woman: soft whispering cloudlets, soft whispering vapour, 
whispering and vanishing. The conversation of the others in the dressing-room 
had become strained. 

He began to beat the frayed end of his ashplant against the base of a pillar. 

He beat his breast with his fist humbly, secretly under cover of the wooden 
armrest. What an awful power, Stephen! 

A flame began to flutter again on Stephen's cheek as he heard in this proud 
address an echo of his own proud musings. You, the leader of the class! 

Then he asked the next boy and the next and the next. 

--So we must distinguish between elliptical and ellipsoidal. They allowed a 
handful of foreigners to subject them. If he sent her the verses? They would be 
read out at breakfast amid the tapping of egg-shells. He was a suave, elderly 
man who balanced his imposing body, when at rest, upon a large silk umbrella. 
And on the wall of another closet there was written in backhand in beautiful 
writing: 



Julius Caesar wrote The Calico Belly. But not peevish. ” 

Mr Holohan admitted that the _artistes_ were no good but the Committee, he 
said, had decided to let the first three concerts go as they pleased and 
reserve all the talent for Saturday night. ” 

“But I’ve a nice partner for you, Mr Bartell D’Arcy, the tenor. Then 
Ginger Mooney lifted up her mug of tea and proposed Maria’s health while all 
the other women clattered with their mugs on the table, and said she was sorry 
she hadn’t a sup of porter to drink it in. 

He halted on the landing before the door and then, grasping the porcelain knob, 
opened the door quickly. A faint marshlight struggling upwards from all the 
ordure through the bristling grey-green weeds. Their sympathy, however, was for 
the blue cars--the cars of their friends, the French. Every day he drew up a 
bill of fare for the family and every night led a party of three or four to the 
theatre to see INGOMAR or THE LADY OF LYONS. ” 

She paused for a moment to get her voice under control and then went on: 

“Then the night before I left I was in my grandmother’s house in Nuns’ 
Island, packing up, and I heard gravel thrown up against the window. 

Why did he not tell it? His father, who kept the racehorses, must be a 
magistrate too like Saurin's father and Nasty Roche's father. The first step in 
the direction of beauty is to understand the frame and scope of the 
imagination, to comprehend the act itself of esthetic apprehension. O, how 
terrible is the lot of those wretched beings! The blood seethes and boils in 
the veins, the brains are boiling in the skull, the heart in the breast glowing 
and bursting, the bowels a red-hot mass of burning pulp, the tender eyes 
flaming like molten balls. 

Lightly, lightly--ever so: Clouds that wrap the vales below At the hour of 
evenstar Lowliest attendants are; Love and laughter song-confessed When the 
heart is heaviest. But you could not have a green rose. His whole speech was a 
mistake from first to last, an utter failure. She was invariably friendly and 
advising--homely, in fact. You have no fear of that. “I thought it was some 
Italian or American. ” 

Mr Holohan seemed to be in a hurry; he advised her to speak to Mr Fitzpatrick. 

Aunt Kate and Gabriel laughed too. I went up the slope calmly but my heart was 
beating quickly with fear that he would seize me by the ankles. 

Mr Hynes leaned against the mantelpiece and asked: 

“Has he paid you yet?” 

“Not yet,” said Mr O’Connor. The board on which he knelt was narrow and 
worn and those who knelt near him were humble followers of Jesus. Nannie 
received us in the hall; and, as it would have been unseemly to have shouted at 
her, my aunt shook hands with her for all. “Of course they are doing their 
best, but really they are not good. 

--Then, said Cranly, you do not intend to become a protestant? 

--I said that I had lost the faith, Stephen answered, but not that I had lost 
self-respect. 

She was alone and still, gazing out to sea; and when she felt his presence and 
the worship of his eyes her eyes turned to him in quiet sufferance of his gaze, 
without shame or wantonness. 

--Of course, said Lynch. . . ” 

“O, the room is all right,” replied Gabriel. For the first time his soul 
revolted against the dull inelegance of Capel Street. In a vague way he 
understood that his father was in trouble and that this was the reason why he 
himself had not been sent back to Clongowes. It was folly. Canker was a disease 
of plants and cancer one of animals: or another different. He was not without 
culture. Isn’t it a terrible thing to die so young as that?” 

“What was he?” asked Gabriel, still ironically. They tried to keep up with 
him, smiling also at his eagerness. 

APRIL 13. 

--I remember that, he said, PULCRA SUNT QUAE VISA PLACENT. She was on her way 
to meet her mother whom she had not seen for many years. When they came out of 
the Park they walked in silence towards the tram; but here she began to tremble 
so violently that, fearing another collapse on her part, he bade her good-bye 
quickly and left her. He liked to sit near him at the fire, looking up at his 
dark fierce face. 

1 Pair Buskins. 

Gabriel’s brows were dark but he raised them quickly and answered: 

“O, no, hardly noticeable. They lived in Clane, a fellow said: there were 
little cottages there and he had seen a woman standing at the half-door of a 
cottage with a child in her arms as the cars had come past from Sallins. 

--Now don't be putting ideas into his head, said Mr Dedalus. 

--I was told not to, Wells said. 

--Many persons have doubts, even religious persons, yet they overcome them or 
put them aside, Cranly said. 

They passed back through the garden and out through the hall where the 
doddering porter was pinning up a hall notice in the frame. He asked in a 
suspicious provincial accent: 

“Who is the man? What’s his name and address?” 

A young man in a cycling-suit cleared his way through the ring of bystanders. 
There were worse husbands. He had never been violent since the boys had grown 
up and she knew that he would walk to the end of Thomas Street and back again 
to book even a small order. Lynch, recovering from his laughter, answered his 
look from his humbled eyes. The big student turned on him, frowning. 

“Tell me, Martin,” he said. ” 

His attitude on this point struck me as strangely liberal in a man of his age. 
His face was heated. From the hall came sounds of encouragement, clapping and 
stamping of feet. 

A veiled sunlight lit up faintly the grey sheet of water where the river was 
embayed. 

--Certainly, said Dante. 

--Well, I must go now, said Stephen, who cared little for such points of 
honour. 

Stephen heard his father's voice break into a laugh which was almost a sob. 

--No. 

“Damn it!” said Lenehan boldly, “I don’t want an introduction. 

--We want no budding buddhists. 

He went into the pantry hastily and put on his overcoat. Then as to money--he 
really had a great sum under his control. Captain Sinico encouraged his visits, 
thinking that his daughter’s hand was in question. ” 

“No, no,” said Mr Fogarty eagerly. “I admire the man personally. Miss 
Kathleen Kearney’s musical career was ended in Dublin after that, he said. 
His soul was foul with sin and he dared not ask forgiveness with the simple 
trust of those whom Jesus, in the mysterious ways of God, had called first to 
His side, the carpenters, the fishermen, poor and simple people following a 
lowly trade, handling and shaping the wood of trees, mending their nets with 
patience. He waited for some minutes listening. He stood up in terror and 
walked blindly into the box. The young men eyed him respectfully while he took 
a trial sip. It was a holy place. The party was increased by a young Englishman 
named Routh whom Jimmy had seen with Ségouin at Cambridge. The night was cold 
and gloomy. He waited for some minutes listening. 

“Who’s not playing fair?” said the other. All the filth of the world, all 
the offal and scum of the world, we are told, shall run there as to a vast 
reeking sewer when the terrible conflagration of the last day has purged the 
world. 

The heavy scowl faded from Cranly's face as MacCann marched briskly towards 
them from the other side of the hall. “Take that, you little whelp!” 

The boy uttered a squeal of pain as the stick cut his thigh. I remarked their 
English accents and listened vaguely to their conversation. Moments of their 
secret life together burst like stars upon his memory. He inquired politely for 
Mr Kernan, placed his gift on the table and sat down with the company on equal 
terms. 



* * * * * 



--REMEMBER ONLY THY LAST THINGS AND THOU SHALT NOT SIN FOR EVER--words taken, 
my dear little brothers in Christ, from the book of Ecclesiastes, seventh 
chapter, fortieth verse. Her son-in-law brought them every year to the lakes 
and they used to go fishing. They looked at him and saw their master's face and 
cloak and knew that he had received his death-wound. Uncle Charles had grown so 
witless that he could no longer be sent out on errands and the disorder in 
settling in the new house left Stephen freer than he had been in Blackrock. 
SIMILITER ATQUE SENIS BACULUS, he was, as the founder would have had him, like 
a staff in an old man's hand, to be leaned on in the road at nightfall or in 
stress of weather, to lie with a lady's nosegay on a garden seat, to be raised 
in menace. Nearly every day when his teaching in the college was ended he used 
to wander down the quays to the second-hand booksellers, to Hickey’s on 
Bachelor’s Walk, to Webb’s or Massey’s on Aston’s Quay, or to 
O’Clohissey’s in the by-street. At the last moment of consciousness the 
whole earthly life passed before the vision of the soul and, ere it had time to 
reflect, the body had died and the soul stood terrified before the judgement 
seat. Play fair,” he said. She listened to all. Mrs Kearney had to stand 
aside to allow the baritone and his accompanist to pass up to the platform. 

He stood still in the gloom of the hall, trying to catch the air that the voice 
was singing and gazing up at his wife. Come, my beloved, where I may Speak to 
your heart. Only prayers in the chapel and then bed. The children, wearing the 
spoils of their crackers, danced and romped noisily and, though he tried to 
share their merriment, he felt himself a gloomy figure amid the gay cocked hats 
and sunbonnets. ” 

“Yes. Only he doesn't know it. He felt the death chill touch the extremities 
and creep onward towards the heart, the film of death veiling the eyes, the 
bright centres of the brain extinguished one by one like lamps, the last sweat 
oozing upon the skin, the powerlessness of the dying limbs, the speech 
thickening and wandering and failing, the heart throbbing faintly and more 
faintly, all but vanquished, the breath, the poor breath, the poor helpless 
human spirit, sobbing and sighing, gurgling and rattling in the throat. 

--Are you as bad as that? asked Moynihan with a broad grin. 

--Out here, Dedalus. I think I had better eat it myself because I'm not well in 
my health lately. 

--I did, Stephen answered. He did not wish her to think that he was interested 
in this delicate boy. 

My love she's handsome, My love she's bony: She's like good whisky When it is 
new; But when 'tis old And growing cold It fades and dies like The mountain 
dew. 

Contrahit orator, variant in carmine vates. 

“Ecod! Corley, you know how to take them,” he said. All the images it had 
awakened were false. 

He saw clearly too his own futile isolation. We're not out for the half mile, 
are we? 

For a swift season of merrymaking the money of his prizes ran through Stephen's 
fingers. 

--Will you tell Doyle with my best compliments that I damned his eyes? answered 
Heron. 

“O, I know about the infallibility of the Pope. She set these on the table 
and invited us to take a little glass of wine. But an unresting doubt flew 
hither and thither before his mind. A slap on the hand or a box on the ear was 
no good: what he wanted was to get a nice warm whipping. ” 

Before leaving the room with Gabriel she signalled to Mr Browne by frowning and 
shaking her forefinger in warning to and fro. The veins stood out on 
Farrington’s forehead, and the pallor of Weathers’ complexion changed to 
peony. His language, so familiar and so foreign, will always be for me an 
acquired speech. But that's you all out. 

--He's coming now, said Heron to the messenger with a haughty drawl, when he 
wants to. 

A tall boy behind Stephen rubbed his hands and said: 

--That's game ball. The ends of her tulle collarette had been carefully 
disordered and a big bunch of red flowers was pinned in her bosom, stems 
upwards. What have you there? he asked, tapping the portfolio under Glynn's 
arm. The master marked the sums and cuts to be done for the next lesson and 
went out. 

The parlour fire would not draw that evening and Mr Dedalus rested the poker 
against the bars of the grate to attract the flame. 

“Gretta tells me you’re not going to take a cab back to Monkstown tonight, 
Gabriel,” said Aunt Kate. . . . Till what? Till he yield to me? No. 
Farrington was just standing another round when Weathers came back. Her face, 
healthier than her sister’s, was all puckers and creases, like a shrivelled 
red apple, and her hair, braided in the same old-fashioned way, had not lost 
its ripe nut colour. 

--Here I am, said Stephen, halting and glancing from Heron to his friend. . a 
bit of all right,” he said regretfully. 

The priest did not turn his head. The only persons who seemed to follow the 
music were Mary Jane herself, her hands racing along the key-board or lifted 
from it at the pauses like those of a priestess in momentary imprecation, and 
Aunt Kate standing at her elbow to turn the page. Why, by God, they wouldn't be 
seen dead in a ten-acre field with them. Perhaps it would be better to insert 
his mother’s name before the surname: Thomas Malone Chandler, or better 
still: T. While her tongue rambled on Gabriel tried to banish from his mind all 
memory of the unpleasant incident with Miss Ivors. On the very moment John 
MacHale, who had been arguing and arguing against it, stood up and shouted out 
with the voice of a lion: ‘_Credo!_’” 

“_I believe!_” said Mr Fogarty. 

The fellows at his table stood up. ” 

“What?” cried Mr Kernan. “When you come next year I may have the pleasure 
of wishing long life and happiness to Mr and Mrs Ignatius Gallaher. O! In the 
virgin womb of the imagination the word was made flesh. 

“Tell me, Lily,” he said in a friendly tone, “do you still go to 
school?” 

“O no, sir,” she answered. After early nightfall the yellow lamps would 
light up, here and there, the squalid quarter of the brothels. Neither Mr 
Henchy nor the old man said anything but, just as the door was closing, Mr 
O’Connor, who had been staring moodily into the fire, called out suddenly: 

“‘Bye, Joe. 

He could still leave the chapel. Evil company on earth is so noxious that the 
plants, as if by instinct, withdraw from the company of whatsoever is deadly or 
hurtful to them. Then late one night as he was undressing for bed she had 
tapped at his door, timidly. Nannie gave the lead and we three knelt down at 
the foot of the bed. They walked northward with a curious feeling of 
disappointment in the exercise, while the city hung its pale globes of light 
above them in a haze of summer evening. 

He listened without sympathy to his father's evocation of Cork and of scenes of 
his youth, a tale broken by sighs or draughts from his pocket flask whenever 
the image of some dead friend appeared in it or whenever the evoker remembered 
suddenly the purpose of his actual visit. 

--And not to have any one person, Cranly said, who would be more than a friend, 
more even than the noblest and truest friend a man ever had. For a full hour he 
had paced up and down, waiting: but he could wait no longer. She told me she 
used to go with a dairyman. 

The concerts were to be on Wednesday, Thursday, Friday and Saturday. Hardly had 
she brought one gentleman into the little pantry behind the office on the 
ground floor and helped him off with his overcoat than the wheezy hall-door 
bell clanged again and she had to scamper along the bare hallway to let in 
another guest. What an awful power, Stephen! 

A flame began to flutter again on Stephen's cheek as he heard in this proud 
address an echo of his own proud musings. 

He remained standing with his two companions at the end of the shed listening 
idly to their talk or to the bursts of applause in the theatre. O, a jesuit for 
your life, for diplomacy! 

He reassumed the provincial's voice and repeated: 

--I TOLD THEM ALL AT DINNER ABOUT IT AND FATHER DOLAN AND I AND ALL OF US WE 
HAD A HEARTY LAUGH TOGETHER OVER IT. ” 

“But poor Mr D’Arcy doesn’t like the snow,” said Aunt Kate, smiling. . 
There now, love! There now!. . . . . And when I ask when my daughter is going 
to be paid I can’t get a civil answer. A huge doll sat with her legs apart in 
the copious easy-chair beside the bed. Some things he could not vouch for (his 
friends had told him), but of others he had had personal experience. . . Look 
out! 

--Oh, Cripes, I'm drownded! 

--One! Two! Three and away! 

--The next! The next! 

--One!. And Stephen smiled too for he knew now that it was not true that Mr 
Casey had a purse of silver in his throat. He had walked the streets long 
enough with friends and with girls. Then he imitated Farrington, saying, 
_“And here was my nabs, as cool as you please,”_ while Farrington looked at 
the company out of his heavy dirty eyes, smiling and at times drawing forth 
stray drops of liquor from his moustache with the aid of his lower lip. He 
hardly knew where he was walking. Not long before, when she had been laid up 
for a day, he had read her out a ghost story and made toast for her at the 
fire. He ran towards her and shouted, but, before he could reach her, she was 
caught by the buffer of the engine and fell to the ground. The horse galloped 
along wearily under the murky morning sky, dragging his old rattling box after 
his heels, and Gabriel was again in a cab with her, galloping to catch the 
boat, galloping to their honeymoon. She forgot nothing and, thanks to her, 
everything that was to be done was done. Little Chandler had come home late for 
tea and, moreover, he had forgotten to bring Annie home the parcel of coffee 
from Bewley’s. The only sailor whose eyes could have been called green was a 
tall man who amused the crowd on the quay by calling out cheerfully every time 
the planks fell: 

“All right! All right!” 

When we were tired of this sight we wandered slowly into Ringsend. He lit a 
candle in the office and went before them to the stairs. His father, therefore, 
was unusually friendly with Villona and his manner expressed a real respect for 
foreign accomplishments; but this subtlety of his host was probably lost upon 
the Hungarian, who was beginning to have a sharp desire for his dinner. 
advancing into the light of the fire. But we are living in a sceptical and, if 
I may use the phrase, a thought-tormented age: and sometimes I fear that this 
new generation, educated or hypereducated as it is, will lack those qualities 
of humanity, of hospitality, of kindly humour which belonged to an older day. 
All I can say is I never heard her sing half so well as long as I am coming 
here. Julia, though she was quite grey, was still the leading soprano in Adam 
and Eve’s, and Kate, being too feeble to go about much, gave music lessons to 
beginners on the old square piano in the back room. The train went on and on. 

Cranly raised his head and held the handball between the two students by way of 
a peace-offering, saying: 

--PAX SUPER TOTUM SANGUINARIUM GLOBUM. Mrs Kearney, with her husband and 
daughter, arrived at the Antient Concert Rooms three-quarters of an hour before 
the time at which the concert was to begin. 

He heard the sob passing loudly down his father's throat and opened his eyes 
with a nervous impulse. 

--Didn't I tell you he was a smiler? said Temple, turning right and left. His 
lungs dilated and sank as if he were inhaling a warm moist unsustaining air and 
he smelt again the moist warm air which hung in the bath in Clongowes above the 
sluggish turf-coloured water. Was that not desire? 

--I speak of normal natures, said Stephen. Decollation they call it in the 
gold. 

My aunt waited until Eliza sighed and then said: 

“Ah, well, he’s gone to a better world. Weakness and timidity and 
inexperience would fall from him in that magic moment. 

“You’re not to put the weight of your body behind it. 

My aunt waited until Eliza sighed and then said: 

“Ah, well, he’s gone to a better world. At the first bend of the road I 
looked back and she was standing at the door. His mind bred vermin. 

--By the bye, said Mr Dedalus at length, the rector, or provincial rather, was 
telling me that story about you and Father Dolan. His anger against her found 
vent in coarse railing at her paramour, whose name and voice and features 
offended his baffled pride: a priested peasant, with a brother a policeman in 
Dublin and a brother a potboy in Moycullen. He wondered how he would pass the 
first night in the novitiate and with what dismay he would wake the first 
morning in the dormitory. Mrs Donnelly bade the children be quiet and listen to 
Maria’s song. His face was heavy, pale and clean-shaven. 

A bell clanged upon her heart. What is art? What is the beauty it expresses? 

--That was the first definition I gave you, you sleepy-headed wretch, said 
Stephen, when I began to try to think out the matter for myself. 

“It’s all right, Mr Shelley,” said the man, pointing with his finger to 
indicate the objective of his journey. When it had ceased all the auditors 
drank from their bottles in silence. She stuck her ugly old face up at me when 
she said it and I had my mouth full of tobacco juice. How characterless they 
looked: Shuley without his deep unbuttoned collar, Ennis without his scarlet 
belt with the snaky clasp, and Connolly without his Norfolk coat with the 
flapless side-pockets! It was a pain to see them, and a sword-like pain to see 
the signs of adolescence that made repellent their pitiable nakedness. His 
hands were white and small, his frame was fragile, his voice was quiet and his 
manners were refined. The catcalls and hisses and mocking cries ran in rude 
gusts round the hall from his scattered fellow students. I asked him why he had 
brought it and he told me he had brought it to have some gas with the birds. He 
lit a candle in the office and went before them to the stairs. 

One evening as he was about to put a morsel of corned beef and cabbage into his 
mouth his hand stopped. And all the priests used to be dining there. “I bar 
the magic-lantern business. It seemed now to play itself, he and his fellow 
actors aiding it with their parts. As soon as she could she excused herself and 
went out after him. All day he had thought of nothing but their leave-taking on 
the steps of the tram at Harold's Cross, the stream of moody emotions it had 
made to course through him and the poem he had written about it. 

He halted on the landing before the door and then, grasping the porcelain knob, 
opened the door quickly. If any boys have special confessors perhaps it will be 
better for them not to change. She was a nice mother but she was not so nice 
when she cried. He heard what her eyes said to him from beneath their cowl and 
knew that in some dim past, whether in life or revery, he had heard their tale 
before. But there’s such a thing as common everyday politeness and gratitude. 
Perhaps a wild rose might be like those colours and he remembered the song 
about the wild rose blossoms on the little green place. 

“Well, Mat,” he said to Mr O’Connor, “how goes it?” 

Mr O’Connor shook his head. 

“Every place is immoral,” he said. 

--Here I am! said Stephen. 

--Who is? 

--Tell McGlade. 

Freddy Malins bade the Misses Morkan good-evening in what seemed an offhand 
fashion by reason of the habitual catch in his voice and then, seeing that Mr 
Browne was grinning at him from the sideboard, crossed the room on rather shaky 
legs and began to repeat in an undertone the story he had just told to Gabriel. 

Her image had passed into his soul for ever and no word had broken the holy 
silence of his ecstasy. 

Stephen walked on at his father's side, listening to stories he had heard 
before, hearing again the names of the scattered and dead revellers who had 
been the companions of his father's youth. But when this brief pride of silence 
upheld him no longer he was glad to find himself still in the midst of common 
lives, passing on his way amid the squalor and noise and sloth of the city 
fearlessly and with a light heart. 

Bah! he had done well to leave the room in disdain. 

Polly knew that she was being watched, but still her mother’s persistent 
silence could not be misunderstood. 



* * * * * 



The director stood in the embrasure of the window, his back to the light, 
leaning an elbow on the brown crossblind, and, as he spoke and smiled, slowly 
dangling and looping the cord of the other blind, Stephen stood before him, 
following for a moment with his eyes the waning of the long summer daylight 
above the roofs or the slow deft movements of the priestly fingers. He rolled 
its body, tender yet brittle as a grain of rice, between thumb and finger for 
an instant before he let it fall from him and wondered would it live or die. He 
had felt a subtle, dark, and murmurous presence penetrate his being and fire 
him with a brief iniquitous lust: it, too, had slipped beyond his grasp leaving 
his mind lucid and indifferent. ” 

“I don’t mind,” said Mr Kernan, smiling a little nervously. No, I never 
heard your voice so good as it is tonight. It is dishonourable and unmanly. He 
gave me the impression that he was repeating something which he had learned by 
heart or that, magnetised by some words of his own speech, his mind was slowly 
circling round and round in the same orbit. She dipped the end of the towel in 
the water-jug and refreshed her eyes with the cool water. 

--Do you believe in the eucharist? Cranly asked. She had taught him where the 
Mozambique Channel was and what was the longest river in America and what was 
the name of the highest mountain in the moon. He wondered had Corley managed it 
successfully. He described to me how he would whip such a boy as if he were 
unfolding some elaborate mystery. He asked himself what else could he have 
done. Stephen turned also and waited for a few moments till his companion's 
ill-humour had had its vent. 

--Really, Simon, you should not speak that way before Stephen. 

--Where I can, Stephen said. ” 

“‘ant we have a little. 

“Why?” repeated Miss Ivors. 

The child, hearing its mother’s voice, broke out into a paroxysm of sobbing. 
He clasped his hands together in the air and his voice shook with fright. 

“Now, you’ll let the fire out the next time!” said the man striking at 
him vigorously with the stick. All the filth of the world, all the offal and 
scum of the world, we are told, shall run there as to a vast reeking sewer when 
the terrible conflagration of the last day has purged the world. The students 
saluted, Temple fumbling as before at the peak of his cap. It was not even the 
way in which he thought of her. And he remembered an evening when he had 
dismounted from a borrowed creaking bicycle to pray to God in a wood near 
Malahide. Mr M’Coy, who wanted to enter the conversation by any door, 
pretended that he had never heard the story. When he smiled he used to uncover 
his big discoloured teeth and let his tongue lie upon his lower lip--a habit 
which had made me feel uneasy in the beginning of our acquaintance before I 
knew him well. C. On the mantelpiece of this little office a little leaden 
battalion of canisters was drawn up and on the table before the window stood 
four or five china bowls which were usually half full of a black liquid. Mr 
Cunningham continued. ,’ he said. To compete with phrasemongers, incapable of 
thinking consecutively for sixty seconds? To submit himself to the criticisms 
of an obtuse middle class which entrusted its morality to policemen and its 
fine arts to impresarios? 

He went often to her little cottage outside Dublin; often they spent their 
evenings alone. After supper in the study hall he would change the number 
pasted up inside his desk from seventy-seven to seventy-six. A dull anger began 
to gather again at the back of his mind and the dull fires of his lust began to 
glow angrily in his veins. 

Mr Dedalus put up his eyeglass and, staring down at him, said quietly and 
kindly: 

--What are you laughing at, you little puppy, you? 

The servants entered and placed the dishes on the table. His face was kind and 
he joined gently the fingers of each hand, forming a frail cage by the union of 
their tips. He had a beautiful death, God be praised. 

Heron made a poor attempt to imitate for his friend Wallis the rector's 
pedantic bass and then, laughing at his failure, asked Stephen to do it. 

“I’ve been to the Moulin Rouge,” Ignatius Gallaher continued when the 
barman had removed their glasses, “and I’ve been to all the Bohemian 
cafés. Place your finger for a moment in the flame of a candle and you will 
feel the pain of fire. One of them, in order to put his Latin to the proof, had 
made him translate short passages from Dilectus and asked him whether it was 
correct to say: TEMPORA MUTANTUR NOS ET MUTAMUR IN ILLIS or TEMPORA MUTANTUR ET 
NOS MUTAMUR IN ILLIS. Gabriel smiled at the three syllables she had given his 
surname and glanced at her. He sang his music with great feeling and volume and 
was warmly welcomed by the gallery; but, unfortunately, he marred the good 
impression by wiping his nose in his gloved hand once or twice out of 
thoughtlessness. 

He stood still in deference to their calls and parried their banter with easy 
words. Besides they were dreadfully afraid that Freddy Malins might turn up 
screwed. Did you ever hear that, Crofton? Listen to this now: splendid thing. 
She called Mr Fitzpatrick away from his screen and told him that her daughter 
had signed for four concerts and that, of course, according to the terms of the 
contract, she should receive the sum originally stipulated for, whether the 
society gave the four concerts or not. If it does not give light enough I shall 
sell it and buy another. ” 

“What?” said Mr Henchy and Mr O’Connor. My aunt fingered the stem of her 
wine-glass before sipping a little. He cursed his want of money and cursed all 
the rounds he had stood, particularly all the whiskies and Apollinaris which he 
had stood to Weathers. Lynch says all women do. ” 

“_François_, the same again. His silent watchful manner had grown upon him 
and he took little part in the games. 

He became the ally of a boy named Aubrey Mills and founded with him a gang of 
adventurers in the avenue. In hell all laws are overturned--there is no thought 
of family or country, of ties, of relationships. Mrs Mooney had first sent her 
daughter to be a typist in a corn-factor’s office but, as a disreputable 
sheriff’s man used to come every other day to the office, asking to be 
allowed to say a word to his daughter, she had taken her daughter home again 
and set her to do housework. She ate the apple and gave it also to Adam who had 
not the moral courage to resist her. The frail gay sound smote his heart more 
strongly than a trumpet blast, and, not daring to lift his eyes, he turned 
aside and gazed, as he walked, into the shadow of the tangled shrubs. She put 
the sleeping child deftly in his arms and said: 

“Here. 

--From me! said Stephen in astonishment. Met her today point blank in Grafton 
Street. Away with God! 

--Blasphemer! Devil! screamed Dante, starting to her feet and almost spitting 
in his face. Then he paid his bill and went out. 

Wells said: 

--O, I say, here's a fellow says he doesn't kiss his mother before he goes to 
bed. I'm old enough to be his grandfather. Shrinking from that life he turned 
towards the wall, making a cowl of the blanket and staring at the great 
overblown scarlet flowers of the tattered wallpaper. After waiting for a little 
time he saw them coming towards him and, when they turned to the right, he 
followed them, stepping lightly in his white shoes, down one side of Merrion 
Square. They drank the health of the Queen of Hearts and of the Queen of 
Diamonds. His very body had waxed old in lowly service of the Lord--in tending 
the fire upon the altar, in bearing tidings secretly, in waiting upon 
worldlings, in striking swiftly when bidden--and yet had remained ungraced by 
aught of saintly or of prelatic beauty. The room was lively. Gabriel’s wife 
served out spoonfuls of the pudding and passed the plates down the table. 

“André. 

--Six months? 

--Eight months, father. 

“So that we had better go to supper,” said Mary Jane, “and finish the 
discussion afterwards. 

--Yes, said Cecil Thunder eagerly, and I saw him lift the pandy-bat over his 
shoulder and he's not allowed to do that. Freddy Malins, who had listened with 
his head perched sideways to hear her better, was still applauding when 
everyone else had ceased and talking animatedly to his mother who nodded her 
head gravely and slowly in acquiescence. 

“I suppose you were in love with this Michael Furey, Gretta,” he said. 

--You made me confess the fears that I have. That is the language of the Holy 
Ghost. They must have gone home by another way. Better pass boldly into that 
other world, in the full glory of some passion, than fade and wither dismally 
with age. He wore a round hat of hard black felt. By thinking of things you 
could understand them. I think he has a grand voice. She noticed that he wore 
his soft brown hat carelessly on the side of his head and that his accent was 
flat. 

Symbol of departure or of loneliness? The verses crooned in the ear of his 
memory composed slowly before his remembering eyes the scene of the hall on the 
night of the opening of the national theatre. She moved her hand about here and 
there in the air and descended on one of the saucers. The priests were always 
the true friends of Ireland. And let you, Stephen, make a novena to your holy 
patron saint, the first martyr, who is very powerful with God, that God may 
enlighten your mind. Victoria and Stephen and Simon. They lived in Clane, a 
fellow said: there were little cottages there and he had seen a woman standing 
at the half-door of a cottage with a child in her arms as the cars had come 
past from Sallins. Folly indeed! Her brothers would laugh and try to wrest the 
page from each other with their strong hard fingers. ” 

Mrs Kearney had to go back to the dressing-room. Then, turning to Cranly, he 
said: 

--Good evening, particularly to you. “Must I have a candle?” 

“O yes,” said Mr Cunningham. 

Gabriel pointed to the statue, on which lay patches of snow. A dark medal of 
blood had formed itself near the man’s head on the tessellated floor. Do you 
remember the night? Cranly lost his temper and began to talk about Wicklow 
bacon. I heard a voice call from one end of the gallery that the light was out. 
One day he had stood beside her looking into the hotel grounds. 

APRIL 27. ” 

Their neighbours had turned to listen to the cross-examination. A little tact 
was necessary. 

“How could they be anything else, Tom?” he said. To please me, I mean. He 
was sorry. His father died; the junior partner of the bank retired. Then, with 
a snort of disgust, he shoved him violently down the steps. He said they were 
to leave the report for him at the _Freeman_ office and he would see that it 
went in. “But won’t you come in and sit down a minute?” 

“No, no, thank you. All day he had thought of nothing but their leave-taking 
on the steps of the tram at Harold's Cross, the stream of moody emotions it had 
made to course through him and the poem he had written about it. ” 

“That’s right. 

“And I own up,” said Mr M’Coy. 

“God, yes,” said Mr Henchy. It came from the comic Irishman in the bench 
behind. All sense of humanity is forgotten. The other, who walked on the verge 
of the path and was at times obliged to step on to the road, owing to his 
companion’s rudeness, wore an amused listening face. --Of course I tried to 
carry it off as best I could. He wanted to sin with another of his kind, to 
force another being to sin with him and to exult with her in sin. But his 
figure fell into rotundity at the waist, his hair was scant and grey and his 
face, when the waves of expression had passed over it, had a ravaged look. 

Smoke went up from the whole earth, from the vapoury oceans, smoke of her 
praise. Another, a brisk old man, whom Mr Dedalus called Johnny Cashman, had 
covered him with confusion by asking him to say which were prettier, the Dublin 
girls or the Cork girls. What an awful power, Stephen! 

A flame began to flutter again on Stephen's cheek as he heard in this proud 
address an echo of his own proud musings. The squalid scene composed itself 
around him; the common accents, the burning gas-jets in the shops, odours of 
fish and spirits and wet sawdust, moving men and women. Stephen's heart began 
slowly to fold and fade with fear like a withering flower. God and religion 
before the world. But Corley had not a subtle mind. 

--Might I ask you what you are talking about? said Stephen urbanely. . 
manufacturing that champagne for those fellows. 

He struck the ferrule of his umbrella on the stone floor of the colonnade. He 
might have tried Higgins for the money, but sure Higgins never had anything for 
himself. 

It was wrong; it was unfair and cruel; and, as he sat in the refectory, he 
suffered time after time in memory the same humiliation until he began to 
wonder whether it might not really be that there was something in his face 
which made him look like a schemer and he wished he had a little mirror to see. 
And when he had tried to open Mr Casey's hand to see if the purse of silver was 
hidden there he had seen that the fingers could not be straightened out: and Mr 
Casey had told him that he had got those three cramped fingers making a 
birthday present for Queen Victoria. The priests were always the true friends 
of Ireland. 

“Where is Gabriel?” she cried. “That’ll be the most convenient place. 
As these had not been well received he had desisted. He revealed many of the 
secrets of religious houses on the Continent and described some of the 
practices which were fashionable in high society and ended by telling, with 
details, a story about an English duchess--a story which he knew to be true. 

“Only I’m an old man now I’d change his tune for him. 

--CREDO UT VOS SANGUINARIUS MENDAX ESTIS, said Cranly, QUIA FACIES VOSTRA 
MONSTRAT UT VOS IN DAMNO MALO HUMORE ESTIS. 

“Sha, ‘s nothing,” said Mr Kernan, closing his mouth and pulling the 
collar of his filthy coat across his neck. 

He fell as fall the mighty ones, Nobly undaunted to the last, And death has now 
united him With Erin’s heroes of the past. They would be for the breakfast in 
the morning after the communion in the college chapel. 

“The working-man,” said Mr Hynes, “gets all kicks and no halfpence. 
Conscious of his desire she was waking from odorous sleep, the temptress of his 
villanelle. From the theatre opposite came the muffled noise of the audience 
and sudden brazen clashes of the soldiers' band. 

“Tell me,” he said across the fire, “what brings our friend in here? What 
does he want?” 

“‘Usha, poor Joe!” said Mr O’Connor, throwing the end of his cigarette 
into the fire, “he’s hard up, like the rest of us. 

When the cook told her everything was ready she went into the women’s room 
and began to pull the big bell. The audience behaved indecorously, as if the 
concert were an informal dress rehearsal. Mrs Kearney was somewhat reassured, 
but she thought well to tell her husband part of her suspicions. “Isn’t 
that fine? What?” 

Mr Crofton said that it was a very fine piece of writing. 

--Try Leopardstown! said a voice from the bench behind. He would know then what 
was the sin of Simon Magus and what the sin against the Holy Ghost for which 
there was no forgiveness. The chaos in which his ardour extinguished itself was 
a cold indifferent knowledge of himself. It began to sob piteously, losing its 
breath for four or five seconds, and then bursting out anew. 

We crossed the Liffey in the ferryboat, paying our toll to be transported in 
the company of two labourers and a little Jew with a bag. And the time of 
dreaming Dreams is over-- As lover to lover, 

Sweetheart, I come. Mr Holohan said that she was Madam Glynn from London. She 
wore a loose open combing-jacket of printed flannel. 

Neither of the others spoke. He stooped to the evil of hypocrisy with others, 
sceptical of their innocence which he could cajole so easily. Madness. Who 
could think such a thought? And, cowering in darkness and abject, he prayed 
mutely to his guardian angel to drive away with his sword the demon that was 
whispering to his brain. 

“It’s well for you,” she said. At his first violent sin he had felt a 
wave of vitality pass out of him and had feared to find his body or his soul 
maimed by the excess. Desisting from this, he began to wander about the far end 
of the field, aimlessly. 

--Then be one of us, said Davin. No one knew how he achieved the stern task of 
living, but his name was vaguely associated with racing tissues. Near the Bank 
Ségouin drew up and Jimmy and his friend alighted. I sat up on the coping of 
the bridge admiring my frail canvas shoes which I had diligently pipeclayed 
overnight and watching the docile horses pulling a tramload of business people 
up the hill. That was the aim of his life. 

He was a fellow out of the third of grammar and, while Stephen was undressing, 
he asked Brother Michael to bring him a round of buttered toast. The attitude 
of rapture in sacred art, the raised and parted hands, the parted lips and eyes 
as of one about to swoon, became for him an image of the soul in prayer, 
humiliated and faint before her Creator. Gabriel’s warm trembling fingers 
tapped the cold pane of the window. One by one they were all becoming shades. 
It was the noise of the waves. Began in Italian and ended in pidgin English. He 
had soon given in to them and allowed them to sweep across and abase his 
intellect, wondering always where they came from, from what den of monstrous 
images, and always weak and humble towards others, restless and sickened of 
himself when they had swept over him. Are you not weary of ardent ways? 

And then? The rhythm died away, ceased, began again to move and beat. The 
furniture had been hustled out through the front garden which was strewn with 
wisps of straw and rope ends and into the huge vans at the gate. The bass and 
the second tenor had already come. As he approached Hume Street corner he found 
the air heavily scented and his eyes made a swift anxious scrutiny of the young 
woman’s appearance. He said she used to squander the money, that she had no 
head, that he wasn’t going to give her his hard-earned money to throw about 
the streets, and much more, for he was usually fairly bad of a Saturday night. 
At the very instant of death the bonds of the flesh are broken asunder and the 
soul at once flies towards God as towards the centre of her existence. ” 

“But, of course,” said Mr Cunningham quietly and effectively, “our 
religion is _the_ religion, the old, original faith. ” 

“And did you not tell him to go back?” asked Gabriel. You have asked me 
what I would do and what I would not do. 

And the fellow who had spoken first said: 

--Yes, that's what I heard too from the fellow in the higher line. She ate the 
apple and gave it also to Adam who had not the moral courage to resist her. He 
shivered as if he had cold slimy water next his skin. 

“Who’s not playing fair?” said the other. He had simply taken advantage 
of Polly’s youth and inexperience: that was evident. 

Stephen pointed to the Tsar's photograph and said: 

--He has the face of a besotted Christ. A side door of the theatre opened 
suddenly and a shaft of light flew across the grass plots. Man, in this earthly 
life, though he be capable of many evils, is not capable of them all at once, 
inasmuch as one evil corrects and counteracts another just as one poison 
frequently corrects another. But his figure fell into rotundity at the waist, 
his hair was scant and grey and his face, when the waves of expression had 
passed over it, had a ravaged look. The lovely smell there was in the wintry 
air: the smell of Clane: rain and wintry air and turf smouldering and corduroy. 
His face was kind and he joined gently the fingers of each hand, forming a 
frail cage by the union of their tips. Then in an instant it happens. Why is he 
on his knees, Father Arnall? 

--He wrote a bad Latin theme, Father Arnall said, and he missed all the 
questions in grammar. White roses and red roses: those were beautiful colours 
to think of. ”_ She was always sent for when the women quarrelled over their 
tubs and always succeeded in making peace. 

A film still veiled his eyes but they burned no longer. “I’m sorry you were 
not in voice tonight. Away with God! 

--Blasphemer! Devil! screamed Dante, starting to her feet and almost spitting 
in his face. His father, who had begun life as an advanced Nationalist, had 
modified his views early. Was that right? His father was a marshal now: higher 
than a magistrate. I said he was terribly burned. 

The Priest was silent. A gentle kick from the tall boy in the bench behind 
urged Stephen to ask a difficult question. He was often to be seen walking with 
policemen in plain clothes, talking earnestly. At the corner of a street the 
shaft of a lorry shivered the window of the hansom in the shape of a star. 

--Are you quite orthodox on that point, Temple? Dixon said suavely. Mr Alleyne 
and Miss Delacour were standing outside the counter and all the clerks had turn 
round in anticipation of something. He was drawing her into them: he would 
drown her. All the lodgers in the house knew something of the affair; details 
had been invented by some. However, when she drew near the limit and her 
friends began to loosen their tongues about her, she silenced them by marrying 
Mr Kearney, who was a bootmaker on Ormond Quay. Some distant lamp or lighted 
window gleamed below me. . . with others. Everyone of us could do something. 
You also told me that when you were a boy in that charming carmelite school you 
ate pieces of dried cowdung. And you know what that word means? Not only to be 
separate from all others but to have not even one friend. 

--Last of all consider the frightful torment to those damned souls, tempters 
and tempted alike, of the company of the devils. She would be there before 
eight. 

He began to feel that he had wronged her. 

--Mr Casey! Simon! said Mrs Dedalus, let it end now. 

“Where?” asked Mr Bartell D’Arcy. 

--How are you off, sir? 

--Right as the mail, Simon. Rody Kickham held the ball by its greasy lace. Was 
she sincere? Had she really any life of her own behind all her propagandism? 
There had never been any ill-feeling between them until that night. 

A gradual warmth, a languorous weariness passed over him descending along his 
spine from his closely cowled head. The recollection brightened his eyes. . . a 
bit of all right,” he said regretfully. I am sure you do. 

--Of course he will, said Mr Dedalus. The fellow called Simon Moonan that name 
because Simon Moonan used to tie the prefect's false sleeves behind his back 
and the prefect used to let on to be angry. From these bowls Mr Kernan tasted 
tea. He took a mouthful, drew it up, saturated his palate with it and then spat 
it forth into the grate. Perhaps they could be happy together. 

The prefect was there again and it was his voice that was saying that he was to 
get up, that Father Minister had said he was to get up and dress and go to the 
infirmary. A little hand-mirror hung above the washstand and during the day a 
white-shaded lamp stood as the sole ornament of the mantelpiece. One by one the 
others took up the air until a full choir of voices was singing. They halted 
too on the steps below him. God's turn had come. 

He opened the geography to study the lesson; but he could not learn the names 
of places in America. Here and there warm isles of sand gleamed above the 
shallow tide and about the isles and around the long bank and amid the shallow 
currents of the beach were lightclad figures, wading and delving. I never heard 
the word in my life. Grafton Street, along which he walked, prolonged that 
moment of discouraged poverty. I am sure you do. Every night as I gazed up at 
the window I said softly to myself the word paralysis. 

Athy, who had been silent, said quietly: 

--You are all wrong. “He was very fond of me and he was such a gentle boy. A 
world, a glimmer or a flower? Glimmering and trembling, trembling and 
unfolding, a breaking light, an opening flower, it spread in endless succession 
to itself, breaking in full crimson and unfolding and fading to palest rose, 
leaf by leaf and wave of light by wave of light, flooding all the heavens with 
its soft flushes, every flush deeper than the other. First you must take your 
degree. That is INTEGRITAS. That’s where he first saw the light. 

But no. 

“The German cardinal wouldn’t submit. 

“Amen,” said Gabriel. He felt against his shirt the agitation of her bosom. 
He was a sporting vagrant armed with a vast stock of stories, limericks and 
riddles. Little Chandler remembered (and the remembrance brought a slight flush 
of pride to his cheek) one of Ignatius Gallaher’s sayings when he was in a 
tight corner: 

“Half time now, boys,” he used to say light-heartedly. When they reached 
Stephen’s Green they crossed the road. It was cold autumn weather but in 
spite of the cold they wandered up and down the roads of the Park for nearly 
three hours. 

After that they lived apart. But Erin, list, his spirit may Rise, like the 
Phœnix from the flames, When breaks the dawning of the day, 

The day that brings us Freedom’s reign. 

--Why then, said Mr Casey, it is a most instructive story. The injured man said 
again as well as he could: 

“I’ ‘ery ‘uch o’liged to you, sir. Was that not desire? 

--I speak of normal natures, said Stephen. Farley was an American. 

Brightness falls from the air. The student's body shook all over and, to ease 
his mirth, he rubbed both his hands delightedly over his groins. When Mrs 
Kernan came into the room drying her hands she came into a solemn company. 

O, the wild rose blossoms On the little green place. The noise in hall died 
away. 

He had heard the names of the passions of love and hate pronounced solemnly on 
the stage and in the pulpit, had found them set forth solemnly in books and had 
wondered why his soul was unable to harbour them for any time or to force his 
lips to utter their names with conviction. To keep the audience continually 
diverted she slipped the doubtful items in between the old favourites. 

Moynihan leaned down towards Stephen's ear and murmured: 

--What price ellipsoidal balls! chase me, ladies, I'm in the cavalry! 

His fellow student's rude humour ran like a gust through the cloister of 
Stephen's mind, shaking into gay life limp priestly vestments that hung upon 
the walls, setting them to sway and caper in a sabbath of misrule. 

“The working-man,” said Mr Hynes, “gets all kicks and no halfpence. In 
spite of all he had done it. 

“How can I?” said the old man, “when there’s no corkscrew?” 

“Wait now, wait now!” said Mr Henchy, getting up quickly. His days and 
works and thoughts could make no atonement for him, the fountains of 
sanctifying grace having ceased to refresh his soul. 

All were waiting: uncle Charles, who sat far away in the shadow of the window, 
Dante and Mr Casey, who sat in the easy-chairs at either side of the hearth, 
Stephen, seated on a chair between them, his feet resting on the toasted boss. 

Yes, his mother was hostile to the idea, as he had read from her listless 
silence. After a rather long pause he announced: 



THE DEATH OF PARNELL _6th October_ 1891 

He cleared his throat once or twice and then began to recite: 



He is dead. They entered the grounds of the college and were led by the 
garrulous porter across the quadrangle. Not this. 

MARCH 30. ” 

“Well? How does he stand?” 

“He wouldn’t promise. 

“For me,” said Aunt Kate, who had been picking a bone, “there was only 
one tenor. 

“There was others at her before me,” said Corley philosophically. O Mary, 
refuge of sinners, intercede for him! O Virgin Undefiled, save him from the 
gulf of death! 

The English lesson began with the hearing of the history. At first Mr Bartell 
D’Arcy refused to take either but one of his neighbours nudged him and 
whispered something to him upon which he allowed his glass to be filled. 

He was sitting on the backless chair in his aunt's kitchen. No memory of the 
past touched him, for his mind was full of a present joy. Or if Mangan’s 
sister came out on the doorstep to call her brother in to his tea we watched 
her from our shadow peer up and down the street. He longed to cry to her from 
his soul, to crush her body against his, to overmaster her. 

In the dressing-room behind the stage she was introduced to the secretary of 
the Society, Mr Fitzpatrick. When the strain of the silence had become somewhat 
painful Miss Healy said to the baritone: 

“Have you seen Mrs Pat Campbell this week?” 

The baritone had not seen her but he had been told that she was very fine. The 
decisive expression of her great florid face satisfied her and she thought of 
some mothers she knew who could not get their daughters off their hands. The 
room had already cleared and from the back room came the clatter of plates and 
knives. 

The scorn and anger in his voice brought Cranly's eyes back from a calm survey 
of the walls of the hall. Was that not desire? 

--I speak of normal natures, said Stephen. She had been made awkward by her not 
wishing to receive the news in too cavalier a fashion or to seem to have 
connived and Polly had been made awkward not merely because allusions of that 
kind always made her awkward but also because she did not wish it to be thought 
that in her wise innocence she had divined the intention behind her mother’s 
tolerance. . . It’s not exactly a sermon, you know. Yet he must get money 
somewhere or other: he had spent his last penny for the g. Air, musty from 
having been long enclosed, hung in all the rooms, and the waste room behind the 
kitchen was littered with old useless papers. ” 

“You’d better speak to Mr Fitzpatrick,” said Mr Holohan distantly. “And 
I’m sure now that he’s gone to his eternal reward he won’t forget you and 
all your kindness to him. It was lovely to be tired. He wanted to sin with 
another of his kind, to force another being to sin with him and to exult with 
her in sin. To him she would unveil her soul's shy nakedness, to one who was 
but schooled in the discharging of a formal rite rather than to him, a priest 
of the eternal imagination, transmuting the daily bread of experience into the 
radiant body of everliving life. He was fond of using soldiers’ obscenities: 
usually he came home in the small hours. Why did you sin? Why did you lend an 
ear to the temptings of friends? Why did you turn aside from your pious 
practices and good works? Why did you not shun the occasions of sin? Why did 
you not leave that evil companion? Why did you not give up that lewd habit, 
that impure habit? Why did you not listen to the counsels of your confessor? 
Why did you not, even after you had fallen the first or the second or the third 
or the fourth or the hundredth time, repent of your evil ways and turn to God 
who only waited for your repentance to absolve you of your sins? Now the time 
for repentance has gone by. . Thanks. ” 

Mr Henchy returned with the candlestick and put it on the table. When the 
morning practice was over the trainer would make his comments and sometimes 
illustrate them by shuffling along for a yard or so comically in an old pair of 
blue canvas shoes. He tried to soothe it but it sobbed more convulsively. She 
had tried to make him ridiculous before people, heckling him and staring at him 
with her rabbit’s eyes. He was thirty-four or thirty-five years of age, so 
that youth could not be pleaded as his excuse; nor could ignorance be his 
excuse since he was a man who had seen something of the world. He told too of 
how the top gallery of the old Royal used to be packed night after night, of 
how one night an Italian tenor had sung five encores to _Let me like a Soldier 
fall_, introducing a high C every time, and of how the gallery boys would 
sometimes in their enthusiasm unyoke the horses from the carriage of some great 
_prima donna_ and pull her themselves through the streets to her hotel. They 
took the train at Westland Row and in a few seconds, as it seemed to Jimmy, 
they were walking out of Kingstown Station. A dim antagonism gathered force 
within him and darkened his mind as a cloud against her disloyalty and when it 
passed, cloud-like, leaving his mind serene and dutiful towards her again, he 
was made aware dimly and without regret of a first noiseless sundering of their 
lives. All the resident young men spoke of her as _The Madam_. No one knew who 
he was but one of the curates said he had served the gentleman with a small 
rum. You ought to come. He wanted to say that literature was above politics. 

She was about to explore another life with Frank. 

“This lad,” said Mr Henchy. 

“Of course I’m right,” said Mr Cunningham. I meant about the. Then, 
turning to Cranly, he said: 

--Good evening, particularly to you. Even if he sent her the verses she would 
not show them to others. 

Stephen, moving away the bystanders, jerked his shoulder angrily in the 
direction of the Tsar's image, saying: 

--Keep your icon. The fellow turned to Simon Moonan and said: 

--We all know why you speak. Even that night as he stumbled homewards along 
Jones's Road he had felt that some power was divesting him of that sudden-woven 
anger as easily as a fruit is divested of its soft ripe peel. It must have been 
a good speech. Nearly all the stalls were closed and the greater part of the 
hall was in darkness. There was no noise on the playgrounds. The man passed 
through the crowd, looking on the spectacle generally with proud satisfaction 
and staring masterfully at the office-girls. 

O how cold and strange it was to think of that! All the dark was cold and 
strange. He wondered at his riot of emotions of an hour before. He took them as 
a warning and, glancing back towards the house which the young woman had 
entered to see that he was not observed, he ran eagerly across the road. 

He rubbed his hands slowly and drily over the difficulty. The glories of Mary 
held his soul captive: spikenard and myrrh and frankincense, symbolizing her 
royal lineage, her emblems, the late-flowering plant and late-blossoming tree, 
symbolizing the age-long gradual growth of her cultus among men. He found 
something mean in the pretty furniture which he had bought for his house on the 
hire system. Now time lay between: the oils of ordination would never anoint 
his body. 

--What funnel? asked Stephen. Let us have the story anyhow. The penitent came 
out. Joe was a good fellow. Nearly all the stalls were closed and the greater 
part of the hall was in darkness. 

APRIL 27. 

“That affected his mind,” she said. He felt completely out-generalled. All 
the lodgers in the house knew something of the affair; details had been 
invented by some. Then, as if he had been unaware of the man’s presence till 
that moment, he shot up his head again, saying: 

“Eh? Are you going to stand there all day? Upon my word, Farrington, you take 
things easy!” 

“I was waiting to see. 

--Hell, Temple said. . spiritual matter. ” 

“O,” said Mr Kernan. ” 

Ignatius Gallaher slapped his friend sonorously on the back. “O’Hara seems 
to be in a bad way. She was a nice mother but she was not so nice when she 
cried. Every impure thought, deliberately yielded to, is a keen lance 
transfixing that sacred and loving heart. Then next Sunday, man, I met her by 
appointment. She has no priest to flirt with, he thought with conscious 
bitterness, remembering how he had seen her last. They were not to eat of the 
fruit of the forbidden tree. Yes. He was judged. He described to me how he 
would whip such a boy as if he were unfolding some elaborate mystery. At the 
corner of a street the shaft of a lorry shivered the window of the hansom in 
the shape of a star. Sorry because he was afraid. He could not strive against 
another. He would tell all his sins. Did he bring his crocodile? Is he the 
shining light now? Well, I discovered him. 

He tried to keep up his tone of cold interrogation, but his voice when he spoke 
was humble and indifferent. As he passed Lenehan took off his cap and, after 
about ten seconds, Corley returned a salute to the air. And Stephen smiled too 
for he knew now that it was not true that Mr Casey had a purse of silver in his 
throat. I am walking beside my father whose name is Simon Dedalus. ” 

Mr Henchy began to snuffle and to rub his hands over the fire at a terrific 
speed. 

“I wouldn’t like children of mine,” he said, “to have too much to say 
to a man like that. I ask you if you ever felt love towards anyone or anything? 

Stephen walked on beside his friend, staring gloomily at the footpath. In other 
words, the synthesis of immediate perception is followed by the analysis of 
apprehension. What an awful power, Stephen! 

A flame began to flutter again on Stephen's cheek as he heard in this proud 
address an echo of his own proud musings. Devotion had gone by the board. He 
might die before his mother came. He often wondered what his grand-uncle prayed 
for so seriously. He lent her books, provided her with ideas, shared his 
intellectual life with her. Would he never get a good job? Would he never have 
a home of his own? He thought how pleasant it would be to have a warm fire to 
sit by and a good dinner to sit down to. Bravo Lancaster! The red rose wins. In 
the silence of the soft grey air he heard the cricket bats from here and from 
there: pock. 

The stroke was playful but not so lightly given as the first one had been. It 
was like waves. Madam Glynn took her stand in a corner of the room, holding a 
roll of music stiffly before her and from time to time changing the direction 
of her startled gaze. In this case the monosyllable had a moral intention. He 
would know then what was the sin of Simon Magus and what the sin against the 
Holy Ghost for which there was no forgiveness. 

A second shrill whistle, prolonged angrily, brought one of the girls to the 
foot of the staircase. 

--And not to have any one person, Cranly said, who would be more than a friend, 
more even than the noblest and truest friend a man ever had. He was excited and 
breathless. But God was merciful to poor sinners who were truly sorry. He asked 
himself what else could he have done. But she wanted to live. But the family 
would look down on her. 

“Someone you were in love with?” he asked ironically. “Leave it to me, 
can’t you?” 

Lenehan said no more. 

“The Isle of Man!” he said. He had done what seemed to him best. How was he 
to blame? Now that she was gone he understood how lonely her life must have 
been, sitting night after night alone in that room. Why, when I was a nipper 
every morning of my life I had a cold bath, winter and summer. The moist blue 
eyes blinked at the fire and the moist mouth fell open at times, munching once 
or twice mechanically when it closed. A graceful image of his, he thought, and 
a just one. He laughed almost slyly and pressed Stephen's arm with an elder's 
affection. The fourth member of the party, however, was too excited to be 
genuinely happy. But the faint smell of the rector's breath had made him feel a 
sick feeling on the morning of his first communion. A doorway, a room, the same 
room, same window. The bell rang. 

The dean returned to the hearth and began to stroke his chin. He walked onward, 
dismayed, wondering whether he had strayed into the quarter of the Jews. He 
began to rock it to and fro in his arms but its wailing cry grew keener. She 
was waiting for us, her figure defined by the light from the half-opened door. 
A light fringe of snow lay like a cape on the shoulders of his overcoat and 
like toecaps on the toes of his goloshes; and, as the buttons of his overcoat 
slipped with a squeaking noise through the snow-stiffened frieze, a cold, 
fragrant air from out-of-doors escaped from crevices and folds. Their trim 
boots prattled as they stood on the steps of the colonnade, talking quietly and 
gaily, glancing at the clouds, holding their umbrellas at cunning angles 
against the few last raindrops, closing them again, holding their skirts 
demurely. Joe was a good fellow. ” 

“Well; and then?” asked Gabriel. It humiliated and shamed him to think that 
he would never be freed from it wholly, however holily he might live or 
whatever virtues or perfections he might attain. At the first bend of the road 
I looked back and she was standing at the door. 

--Well, they drank that and it was found out who did it by the smell. It 
surprised him to see that the play which he had known at rehearsals for a 
disjointed lifeless thing had suddenly assumed a life of its own. He told 
himself that it was simply his room with the door open. Her head was leaned 
against the window curtains and in her nostrils was the odour of dusty 
cretonne. 

He stood still in the gloom of the hall, trying to catch the air that the voice 
was singing and gazing up at his wife. 

In the vestry a plump fresh-faced jesuit and an elderly man, in shabby blue 
clothes, were dabbling in a case of paints and chalks. Villona returned quietly 
to his piano and played voluntaries for them. But as soon as his father-in-law 
was dead Mr Mooney began to go to the devil. 

He turned to the right towards Capel Street. But him no woman's eyes had wooed. 
Yes? What? Yes? His flesh shrank together as it felt the approach of the 
ravenous tongues of flames, dried up as it felt about it the swirl of stifling 
air. Either they went to the left towards the Dublin mountains or along the 
Goatstown road and thence into Dundrum, coming home by Sandyford. Lily, the 
caretaker’s daughter, did housemaid’s work for them. The firmament was as a 
scroll rolled away. He was not foxing. He had a high opinion of Mr Cunningham 
as a judge of character and as a reader of faces. He had often thought it 
strange that Vincent Heron had a bird's face as well as a bird's name. ” 

“And everything. “That’ll be the most convenient place. ” 

“Indeed, that’s true,” said my aunt. After early nightfall the yellow 
lamps would light up, here and there, the squalid quarter of the brothels. Time 
is, time was, but time shall be no more! Time was to sin in secrecy, to indulge 
in that sloth and pride, to covet the unlawful, to yield to the promptings of 
your lower nature, to live like the beasts of the field, nay worse than the 
beasts of the field, for they, at least, are but brutes and have no reason to 
guide them: time was, but time shall be no more. Time is, time was, but time 
shall be no more! Time was to sin in secrecy, to indulge in that sloth and 
pride, to covet the unlawful, to yield to the promptings of your lower nature, 
to live like the beasts of the field, nay worse than the beasts of the field, 
for they, at least, are but brutes and have no reason to guide them: time was, 
but time shall be no more. In a quiet bystreet a German band of five players in 
faded uniforms and with battered brass instruments was playing to an audience 
of street arabs and leisurely messenger boys. Then an impromptu square dance, 
the men devising original figures. The space of sky above us was the colour of 
ever-changing violet and towards it the lamps of the street lifted their feeble 
lanterns. 

“Who’s playing up there?” asked Gabriel. 

The child, hearing its mother’s voice, broke out into a paroxysm of sobbing. 
White pudding and eggs and sausages and cups of tea. He pointed down the 
snow-covered quay from where the sound of shrill prolonged whistling was borne 
in. Those days might, without exaggeration, be called spacious days: and if 
they are gone beyond recall let us hope, at least, that in gatherings such as 
this we shall still speak of them with pride and affection, still cherish in 
our hearts the memory of those dead and gone great ones whose fame the world 
will not willingly let die. The whole conclave except these two was unanimous. 
We spent a long time walking about the noisy streets flanked by high stone 
walls, watching the working of cranes and engines and often being shouted at 
for our immobility by the drivers of groaning carts. 

The oblong skull beneath did not turn to meet this shaft of thought and yet the 
shaft came back to its bowstring; for he saw in a moment the student's 
whey-pale face. Well then, let her go and be damned to her! She could love some 
clean athlete who washed himself every morning to the waist and had black hair 
on his chest. He told her the names of the ships he had been on and the names 
of the different services. 

His blood began to murmur in his veins, murmuring like a sinful city summoned 
from its sleep to hear its doom. We have had too much God In Ireland. 

Temple turned on him his dark gipsy eyes. 

--Do you know what limbo is? he cried. I want to go home. 

Sometimes in return for his theories she gave out some fact of her own life. 
Escape! She must escape! Frank would save her. She has no priest to flirt with, 
he thought with conscious bitterness, remembering how he had seen her last. 

--He had, faith, Temple said. A voice spoke softly to Stephen's lonely heart, 
bidding him go and telling him that his friendship was coming to an end. ” 

“Ah, poor James!” said Eliza. 

“Father Purdon? Father Purdon?” said the invalid. Of course the girl or 
woman, or whatever she was, was an enthusiast but there was a time for all 
things. Other students stood or sat near him laughing at his handiwork. ” 

“There’s no tumblers,” said the old man. It is before you must weigh 
well, not after. 

--Good morning, everybody, said Stephen, smiling and kissing the tips of his 
fingers in adieu. The porter halted on the stairs to settle his guttering 
candle. What with your name and your ideas--Are you Irish at all? 

--Come with me now to the office of arms and I will show you the tree of my 
family, said Stephen. But, however well we fought, we never won siege or battle 
and all our bouts ended with Joe Dillon’s war dance of victory. She answered 
placidly that she had had a beautiful crossing and that the captain had been 
most attentive to her. Useless. She is not out yet. Am I alarmed? About what? 
That she will never be out again. I understand it so. The world, it seems, is 
drearier than even you, Lynch, imagined. What, then, had become of that 
deep-rooted shyness of his which had made him loth to eat or drink under a 
strange roof? What had come of the pride of his spirit which had always made 
him conceive himself as a being apart in every order? 

The Reverend Stephen Dedalus, S. Then he smelt it with both nostrils, bit a 
tiny piece, spat it out and threw the fig rudely into the gutter. 

--And which are they taking? asked the fellow who had spoken first. When he 
brought the blouse home Annie kissed him and said it was very pretty and 
stylish; but when she heard the price she threw the blouse on the table and 
said it was a regular swindle to charge ten and elevenpence for it. He had not 
intended to stay a moment because concerts and _artistes_ bored him 
considerably but he remained leaning against the mantelpiece. You remember the 
pigs and forget that. As he walked on slowly, timing his pace to theirs, he 
watched Corley’s head which turned at every moment towards the young 
woman’s face like a big ball revolving on a pivot. The cabin door opened and 
he saw the Hungarian standing in a shaft of grey light: 

“Daybreak, gentlemen!” 





TWO GALLANTS 

THE grey warm evening of August had descended upon the city and a mild warm 
air, a memory of summer, circulated in the streets. Then, turning to Cranly, he 
said: 

--Good evening, particularly to you. “He hasn’t got those little pigs’ 
eyes for nothing. . . over your boots, Gretta, isn’t it?” 

“Yes,” said Mrs Conroy. He goes in to represent the labour classes. People 
used to say that Ignatius Gallaher was wild. The song seemed to be in the old 
Irish tonality and the singer seemed uncertain both of his words and of his 
voice. 

--No, no, said Stephen, smiling, I mean-- 

--Yes, yes; I see, said the dean quickly, I quite catch the point: DETAIN. Mr 
Cunningham said: 

“It is supposed--they say, you know--to take place in the depot where they 
get these thundering big country fellows, omadhauns, you know, to drill. 

Dublin was a new and complex sensation. She cried and threw her arms round his 
neck, saying: 

“O Bob! Bob! What am I to do? What am I to do at all?” 

She would put an end to herself, she said. Asked Davin if he might offer him 
some refreshment. Then he resumed: 

--Now let us try for a moment to realize, as far as we can, the nature of that 
abode of the damned which the justice of an offended God has called into 
existence for the eternal punishment of sinners. He came to the woman, the 
weaker vessel, and poured the poison of his eloquence into her ear, promising 
her--O, the blasphemy of that promise!--that if she and Adam ate of the 
forbidden fruit they would become as gods, nay as God Himself. 

Lynch nodded. Brother Quaid. Brother Keogh. Brother MacArdle. Brother MacArdle. 
-- 

Their piety would be like their names, like their faces, like their clothes, 
and it was idle for him to tell himself that their humble and contrite hearts, 
it might be, paid a far richer tribute of devotion than his had ever been, a 
gift tenfold more acceptable than his elaborate adoration. God would look down 
on him and on them and would love them all. In hell, on the contrary, one 
torment, instead of counteracting another, lends it still greater force: and, 
moreover, as the internal faculties are more perfect than the external senses, 
so are they more capable of suffering. He sang his music with great feeling and 
volume and was warmly welcomed by the gallery; but, unfortunately, he marred 
the good impression by wiping his nose in his gloved hand once or twice out of 
thoughtlessness. 

--But why are they sent to hell if Jesus said they were all to come? Temple 
said, his eyes searching Glynn's eyes. Thought this in bed last night but was 
too lazy and free to add to it. 

--Next business? said MacCann. 

“‘Course he is,” said Mr Kernan, “and a damned decent Orangeman too. 

“Righto!” said Mr Cunningham promptly. “Next year I may take a little 
skip over here now that I’ve broken the ice. Then he took up the corkscrew 
and went out of the door sideways, muttering some form of salutation. It was a 
holy place. ‘He has extensive house property in the city and three places of 
business and isn’t it to his own advantage to keep down the rates? He’s a 
prominent and respected citizen,’ said I, ‘and a Poor Law Guardian, and he 
doesn’t belong to any party, good, bad, or indifferent. Was that not desire? 

--I speak of normal natures, said Stephen. Her name sprang to my lips at 
moments in strange prayers and praises which I myself did not understand. 

--Broke? What is this I hear? What is this? Your name is! said the prefect of 
studies. A fellow was coming out of the bicycle house and I fell and they got 
broken. This furious music allayed his dread and, leaning against the 
windowledge, he let his eyelids close again. Was she sincere? Had she really 
any life of her own behind all her propagandism? There had never been any 
ill-feeling between them until that night. 

But Lenehan could well believe it; he nodded gravely. He can have me. Did he 
bring his crocodile? Is he the shining light now? Well, I discovered him. Dante 
covered her plate with her hands and said: 

--No, thanks. How simple and beautiful was life after all! And life lay all 
before him. He gave me the impression that he was repeating something which he 
had learned by heart or that, magnetised by some words of his own speech, his 
mind was slowly circling round and round in the same orbit. . . . I’ve spent 
a lot of money’? Mean little shoeboy of hell! I suppose he forgets the time 
his little old father kept the hand-me-down shop in Mary’s Lane. 

They shook hands. So far as this side of esthetic philosophy extends, Aquinas 
will carry me all along the line. I remember Crofton saying to me when we came 
out----” 

“But he’s an Orangeman, Crofton, isn’t he?” said Mr Power. “You can 
never know women. ” 

“She’s all right,” said Corley. 

“I was told to ask for the bottles. 

“Sit down, Joe,” said Mr O’Connor, “we’re just talking about the 
Chief. Her name was Mrs Sinico. Gretta caught a dreadful cold. ’ But, sure, 
it’s worse whenever he gets a job; he drinks it all. He had felt proud and 
happy then, happy that she was his, proud of her grace and wifely carriage. Are 
you not weary of ardent ways? 

Above the flame the smoke of praise Goes up from ocean rim to rim. He is said 
to have baptized as many as ten thousand idolaters in one month. 

--We are assembled here today, my dear little brothers in Christ, for one brief 
moment far away from the busy bustle of the outer world to celebrate and to 
honour one of the greatest of saints, the apostle of the Indies, the patron 
saint also of your college, saint Francis Xavier. The reporter called it a 
tragic death. 

He was a tall, slender young man with a light brown moustache. She was 
preparing to go away with her companions. But one thing only, he said, he would 
ask of his hearers. That's why she came with me to the tram. 

Of course, the investment was a good one and Ségouin had managed to give the 
impression that it was by a favour of friendship the mite of Irish money was to 
be included in the capital of the concern. 

But his voice was no longer angry and Stephen wondered was he thinking of her 
greeting to him under the porch. I’m surprised at boys like you, educated, 
reading such stuff. I could understand it if you were. My heart is quite calm 
now. O, Erin, mourn with grief and woe For he lies dead whom the fell gang Of 
modern hypocrites laid low. Then the two next-door girls handed round the nuts. 

The essay was for him the chief labour of his week and every Tuesday, as he 
marched from home to the school, he read his fate in the incidents of the way, 
pitting himself against some figure ahead of him and quickening his pace to 
outstrip it before a certain goal was reached or planting his steps 
scrupulously in the spaces of the patchwork of the pathway and telling himself 
that he would be first and not first in the weekly essay. No one wanted him; he 
was outcast from life’s feast. They said you got stinking stuff to drink when 
you were in the infirmary. 

Creatures were in the field: one, three, six: creatures were moving in the 
field, hither and thither. And let you, Stephen, make a novena to your holy 
patron saint, the first martyr, who is very powerful with God, that God may 
enlighten your mind. The best helpers the language has. She held an open book 
on her knees and was pointing out something in it to Constantine who, dressed 
in a man-o’-war suit, lay at her feet. 

He leaned back weakly in his desk. 

--CREDO UT VOS SANGUINARIUS MENDAX ESTIS, said Cranly, QUIA FACIES VOSTRA 
MONSTRAT UT VOS IN DAMNO MALO HUMORE ESTIS. 

My aunt brought the dish from the safe and put it on the table. 

--And was he annoyed, Simon? 

--Annoyed? Not he! MANLY LITTLE CHAP! he said. Hom! 

He gave a loud cough of laughter, smiled broadly and tugged twice at the 
straw-coloured goatee which hung from his blunt chin. They sat together in 
class, knelt together in the chapel, talked together after beads over their 
lunches. Maria superintended the distribution of the barmbrack and saw that 
every woman got her four slices. 

He produced four candle-butts from the side-pockets of his soutane and placed 
them deftly among the coals and twisted papers. . . naughty girl. You needn’t 
sham: You know I am. Then I should have to like it also. 

--He had, faith, Temple said. For, remember, the fire of hell gives forth no 
light. 

As he stood silent in the middle of the room she came over to him and embraced 
him gaily and gravely. Yet at that instant, humbled and alert in their look, 
they were lit by one tiny human point, the window of a shrivelled soul, 
poignant and self-embittered. 

“Miss Furlong, what shall I send you?” he asked. 

“Yes,” said Mr Cunningham. 

Dr Halpin, assistant house surgeon of the City of Dublin Hospital, stated that 
the deceased had two lower ribs fractured and had sustained severe contusions 
of the right shoulder. 

Dixon smiled and turned his ring. We arranged to go along the Wharf Road until 
we came to the ships, then to cross in the ferryboat and walk out to see the 
Pigeon House. They began to exchange stories. His father, remonstrative, but 
covertly proud of the excess, had paid his bills and brought him home. The 
granite stone of the bridge was beginning to be warm and I began to pat it with 
my hands in time to an air in my head. It was something to have a friend like 
that. Farrington was just standing another round when Weathers came back. And 
there were nice sentences in Doctor Cornwell's Spelling Book. 

“O, do go, Gabriel,” she cried. The pandybat came down on it with a loud 
smacking sound: one, two, three, four, five, six. ” 

The porter took up his candle again, but slowly for he was surprised by such a 
novel idea. Even in literature, the highest and most spiritual art, the forms 
are often confused. There was a pause of a few seconds: and then the piano was 
heard. He was sick then. Why? 

He turned seaward from the road at Dollymount and as he passed on to the thin 
wooden bridge he felt the planks shaking with the tramp of heavily shod feet. 
We never can say what is in us. Cork is a city. He had spoken of himself, of 
his own loneliness which he feared. No, I treat you as your grandfather treated 
me when I was a young chap. His arms trembled with anger and suddenly bending 
to the child’s face he shouted: 

“Stop!” 

The child stopped for an instant, had a spasm of fright and began to scream. 
Then he read the flyleaf from the bottom to the top till he came to his own 
name. The barometer of his emotional nature was set for a spell of riot. Term, 
vacation; tunnel, out; noise, stop. How far away it was! It was better to go to 
bed to sleep. He would love that, he said, better than anything in this world; 
and his voice, as he led me monotonously through the mystery, grew almost 
affectionate and seemed to plead with me that I should understand him. He stood 
up to put on his coat and waistcoat, more helpless than ever. The adventure of 
meeting Gallaher after eight years, of finding himself with Gallaher in 
Corless’s surrounded by lights and noise, of listening to Gallaher’s 
stories and of sharing for a brief space Gallaher’s vagrant and triumphant 
life, upset the equipoise of his sensitive nature. He rolled his stockings off 
and put on his nightshirt quickly and knelt trembling at his bedside and 
repeated his prayers quickly, fearing that the gas would go down. 
Farrington’s eyes wandered at every moment in the direction of one of the 
young women. 

“It’s such a relief,” said Aunt Kate to Mrs Conroy, “that Gabriel is 
here. I give them monthly examinations to see that they are profiting by my 
tuition. Perhaps Gallaher might be able to get it into some London paper for 
him. He was sorry. On Sunday mornings as he passed the church door he glanced 
coldly at the worshippers who stood bareheaded, four deep, outside the church, 
morally present at the mass which they could neither see nor hear. J. 

His name in that new life leaped into characters before his eyes and to it 
there followed a mental sensation of an undefined face or colour of a face. 

The latter was a stranger to him but in the darkness, by the aid of the glowing 
cigarette tips, he could make out a pale dandyish face over which a smile was 
travelling slowly, a tall overcoated figure and a hard hat. ” 

His wizened face broke into a broader smile, and the three young ladies laughed 
in musical echo to his pleasantry, swaying their bodies to and fro, with 
nervous jerks of their shoulders. . . Or was it that----?” 

Mr Fogarty interrupted. 

It was the signal for their onset. He would fall. 

The Priest was silent. 

He drank another cup of hot tea and Fleming said: 

--What's up? Have you a pain or what's up with you? 

--I don't know, Stephen said. ” 

“I often told Julia,” said Aunt Kate emphatically, “that she was simply 
thrown away in that choir. Let me ask you a question. Yes, it was her body he 
smelt, a wild and languid smell, the tepid limbs over which his music had 
flowed desirously and the secret soft linen upon which her flesh distilled 
odour and a dew. O how could they laugh about it that way? 

He looked at Athy's rolled-up sleeves and knuckly inky hands. It may be uphill 
pedalling at first. What are our ideas or ambitions? Play. Ideas! Why, that 
bloody bleating goat Temple has ideas. As long as you commit that sin, my poor 
child, you will never be worth one farthing to God. ” 

“Of course, the working-classes should be represented,” said the old man. 

But what was the name the woman had called Kitty O'Shea that Mr Casey would not 
repeat? He thought of Mr Casey walking through the crowds of people and making 
speeches from a wagonette. He suffered its agony. Even he was sensible of the 
decorous atmosphere and even he began to respond to the religious stimulus. 
While the men were milking the boys would take turns in riding the tractable 
mare round the field. They turn upon those accomplices and upbraid them and 
curse them. She answered placidly that she had had a beautiful crossing and 
that the captain had been most attentive to her. In her home anyway she had 
shelter and food; she had those whom she had known all her life about her. 

“Is it to be the last?” he said. The corridors were darkly lit and the 
chapel was darkly lit. Miss Delacour was a middle-aged woman of Jewish 
appearance. He carried on the tradition of his Napoleon, the great Blackwhite, 
whose memory he evoked at times by legend and mimicry. He asked what they did 
it for. 

“Well?” he said. 

--O, Holy Paul, I forgot about Maurice, said Mr Dedalus. 

The grin broadened on Nash's freckled face as he turned to Stephen and said: 

--And do you like Cardinal Newman, Dedalus? 

--O, many say that Newman has the best prose style, Heron said to the other two 
in explanation, of course he's not a poet. As for Freddy Malins he was 
speechless with laughter. But perhaps it was only the result of living in 
London amid the bustle and competition of the Press. A dull yellow light 
brooded over the houses and the river; and the sky seemed to be descending. And 
the time of dreaming Dreams is over-- As lover to lover, 

Sweetheart, I come. He shivered as if he had cold slimy water next his skin. 
All the lodgers in the house knew something of the affair; details had been 
invented by some. 

--And was he annoyed, Simon? 

--Annoyed? Not he! MANLY LITTLE CHAP! he said. Are your doubts on that point 
too strong? 

--I do not wish to overcome them, Stephen answered. 

--God and religion before everything! Dante cried. He laughed almost slyly and 
pressed Stephen's arm with an elder's affection. 







XXII 

Of that so sweet imprisonment My soul, dearest, is fain-- Soft arms that woo me 
to relent And woo me to detain. 

“Good-night, Dan,” he said gaily. And when I was only a week in the convent 
he died and he was buried in Oughterard where his people came from. The boys 
answered him phrase by phrase. He made light of his accident. Marx is only a 
bloody cod. And his father had given him two five-shilling pieces for pocket 
money. 

“You know you can’t kid me, Corley,” he said. 

“God!” he exclaimed, resuming his natural face, “I never saw such an eye 
in a man’s head. 

--Blast him, curse him! said Cranly broadly. Did you ever see such a 
go-by-the-wall? 

His phrase was greeted by a strange laugh from a student who lounged against 
the wall, his peaked cap down on his eyes. The voice, made plaintive by 
distance and by the singer’s hoarseness, faintly illuminated the cadence of 
the air with words expressing grief: 



O, the rain falls on my heavy locks And the dew wets my skin, My babe lies 
cold. The sentence of saint James which says that he who offends against one 
commandment becomes guilty of all, had seemed to him first a swollen phrase 
until he had begun to grope in the darkness of his own state. 

--I see. 

Stephen smiled at this side-thrust. . . . . . . . What?” 

His bright, small eyes searched his companion’s face for reassurance. 
“Tricky Dicky Tierney. ” 

“O, he’s as tricky as they make ‘em,” said Mr Henchy. “That showed 
the faith he had. The fellows seemed to him to have grown smaller: that was 
because a sprinter had knocked him down the day before, a fellow out of second 
of grammar. She was very fond of that purse because Joe had brought it to her 
five years before when he and Alphy had gone to Belfast on a Whit-Monday trip. 
How characterless they looked: Shuley without his deep unbuttoned collar, Ennis 
without his scarlet belt with the snaky clasp, and Connolly without his Norfolk 
coat with the flapless side-pockets! It was a pain to see them, and a 
sword-like pain to see the signs of adolescence that made repellent their 
pitiable nakedness. One hand played in the bass the melody of _Silent, O 
Moyle_, while the other hand careered in the treble after each group of notes. 
She died on the instant. You know that well. By hell, I saw that at once. If 
they didn’t pay her to the last farthing she would make Dublin ring. She set 
these on the table and invited us to take a little glass of wine. Soft language 
issued from their spittleless lips as they swished in slow circles round and 
round the field, winding hither and thither through the weeds, dragging their 
long tails amid the rattling canisters. He held her hand and she knew that he 
was speaking to her, saying something about the passage over and over again. I 
remarked their English accents and listened vaguely to their conversation. They 
were like poetry but they were only sentences to learn the spelling from. 
Before the fire an old woman was busy making tea and, as she bustled at the 
task, she told in a low voice of what the priest and the doctor had said. God 
spoke to you by so many voices, but you would not hear. 

He stood, holding her head between his hands. Still it was early. Jimmy, under 
generous influences, felt the buried zeal of his father wake to life within 
him: he aroused the torpid Routh at last. 

Stephen looked at the faces of the fellows but they were all looking across the 
playground. While we were waiting he brought out the catapult which bulged from 
his inner pocket and explained some improvements which he had made in it. I 
don't think that it has a meaning, but the true and the beautiful are akin. 

He tried to keep up his tone of cold interrogation, but his voice when he spoke 
was humble and indifferent. Simon and Stephen and Victoria. It would be 
splendid for Gretta too if she’d come. ” 

A tall wizen-faced man, with a stiff grizzled moustache and swarthy skin, who 
was passing out with his partner said: 

“And may we have some refreshment, too, Miss Morkan?” 

“Julia,” said Aunt Kate summarily, “and here’s Mr Browne and Miss 
Furlong. My eyes were often full of tears (I could not tell why) and at times a 
flood from my heart seemed to pour itself out into my bosom. Perhaps you are 
the boy in this college whom God designs to call to Himself. This union exalted 
him, wore away the rough edges of his character, emotionalised his mental life. 
“O’Hara seems to be in a bad way. Into the grave with it. No. You would 
not. ” 

“Have you seen Paris?” 

“I should think I have! I’ve knocked about there a little. ” 

She would not cry many tears at leaving the Stores. The sergeant makes them 
stand in a row against the wall and hold up their plates. 



* * * * * 



He could wait no longer. 

--The Greek, the Turk, the Chinese, the Copt, the Hottentot, said Stephen, all 
admire a different type of female beauty. Amen. 

The preacher began to speak in a quiet friendly tone. And Ginger Mooney was 
always saying what she wouldn’t do to the dummy who had charge of the irons 
if it wasn’t for Maria. He believed this all the more, and with trepidation, 
because of the divine gloom and silence wherein dwelt the unseen Paraclete, 
Whose symbols were a dove and a mighty wind, to sin against Whom was a sin 
beyond forgiveness, the eternal mysterious secret Being to Whom, as God, the 
priests offered up mass once a year, robed in the scarlet of the tongues of 
fire. Two boys were standing in the shelter of a doorway, smoking, and before 
he reached them he had recognised Heron by his voice. He was fond of using 
soldiers’ obscenities: usually he came home in the small hours. He began to 
talk of the weather, saying that it would be a very hot summer and adding that 
the seasons had changed greatly since he was a boy--a long time ago. The 
injuries were not sufficient to have caused death in a normal person. A dull 
yellow light brooded over the houses and the river; and the sky seemed to be 
descending. Some distant lamp or lighted window gleamed below me. Ideas! Why, 
that bloody bleating goat Temple has ideas. 

Blinded by his tears and by the light of God's mercifulness he bent his head 
and heard the grave words of absolution spoken and saw the priest's hand raised 
above him in token of forgiveness. The car steered out slowly for Grafton 
Street while the two young men pushed their way through the knot of gazers. A 
vision of their life, which his father's words had been powerless to evoke, 
sprang up before him out of the word cut in the desk. The class must be doing 
the themes or perhaps Father Arnall was reading out of the book. Only they 
don’t believe in the Pope and in the mother of God. I need hardly remind you 
that during the days of the retreat all boys are expected to preserve a quiet 
and pious demeanour and to shun all loud unseemly pleasure. . . to cook it, 
pa,” said the little boy. 

Lynch began to sing softly and solemnly in a deep bass voice: 

IMPLETA SUNT QUAE CONCINIT DAVID FIDELI CARMINE DICENDO NATIONIBUS REGNAVIT A 
LIGNO DEUS. But I don't believe they will be flogged. Perhaps they will be sent 
up for twice nine. 

--I don't care a damn about you, Cranly, answered Temple, moving out of reach 
of the uplifted stave and pointing at Stephen. 

Mrs Kearney brought her daughter over to them, and talked to them amiably. 
Twelve, thirteen: for two came wheeling down from the upper sky. Mother asked 
it back. 

When the enamelled basin had been fitted into the well of the sink and the old 
washing glove flung on the side of it he allowed his mother to scrub his neck 
and root into the folds of his ears and into the interstices at the wings of 
his nose. I found it strange that neither I nor the day seemed in a mourning 
mood and I felt even annoyed at discovering in myself a sensation of freedom as 
if I had been freed from something by his death. Confess! He had to confess 
every sin. 



MY EXCELLENT FRIEND BOMBADOS. . . . . . . . ” 

“Very good, you needn’t wait to see. I supple and suave. 

“O, Mr D’Arcy,” cried Mary Jane, “it’s downright mean of you to break 
off like that when we were all in raptures listening to you. ” 

“Yes, yes, Miss Morkan is right,” said Mr Browne. It was as much as to say: 
_I have you properly taped, my lad_. He could remember only that she had worn a 
shawl about her head like a cowl and that her dark eyes had invited and 
unnerved him. It is a good odour to breathe. He yawned again. ” 

“Ah!. Saw her drinking tea and eating cakes in Johnston's, Mooney and 
O'Brien's. Tizzie Dunn was dead, too, and the Waters had gone back to England. 
” 

“On the photograph!” exclaimed Mr Kernan. Simultaneously Mr Alleyne, a 
little man wearing gold-rimmed glasses on a clean-shaven face, shot his head up 
over a pile of documents. . I couldn’t. Here we are gathered together for a 
brief moment from the bustle and rush of our everyday routine. She stuck her 
ugly old face up at me when she said it and I had my mouth full of tobacco 
juice. 

It was easy to be good. QUASI PALMA EXALTATA SUM IN GADES ET QUASI PLANTATIO 
ROSAE IN JERICHO. She doesn’t know my name. She took out her purse with the 
silver clasps and read again the words _A Present from Belfast_. His face was 
very truculent, grey and massive, with black cavernous nostrils and circled by 
a scanty white fur. A sudden tide of joy went leaping out of his heart. As the 
husband was often away and the daughter out giving music lessons Mr Duffy had 
many opportunities of enjoying the lady’s society. The first tenor and the 
baritone and Miss Healy stood together, waiting tranquilly, but Mr Bell’s 
nerves were greatly agitated because he was afraid the audience would think 
that he had come late. Father Arnall sat at a table to the left of the altar. 

He could hear the cries of the fellows on the playgrounds. All at once the idea 
struck him that perhaps Corley had seen her home by another way and given him 
the slip. She had her Sunday finery on. A little boy came running down the 
stairs. The young men supped in a snug room lit by electric candle-lamps. 

Gabriel took his seat boldly at the head of the table and, having looked to the 
edge of the carver, plunged his fork firmly into the goose. Some things he 
could not vouch for (his friends had told him), but of others he had had 
personal experience. “I couldn’t think of the name. Old servants in old 
dress were in the ironing-room above the staircase. That's the real Ally Daly. 
The artist, like the God of creation, remains within or behind or beyond or 
above his handiwork, invisible, refined out of existence, indifferent, paring 
his fingernails. The streets, shuttered for the repose of Sunday, swarmed with 
a gaily coloured crowd. 

Are you not weary of ardent ways, Lure of the fallen seraphim? Tell no more of 
enchanted days. I used to take them out, man, on the tram somewhere and pay the 
tram or take them to a band or a play at the theatre or buy them chocolate and 
sweets or something that way. All the leisure which his school life left him 
was passed in the company of subversive writers whose jibes and violence of 
speech set up a ferment in his brain before they passed out of it into his 
crude writings. The moon was blood-red. It was seventeen minutes past eleven: 
she would have lots of time to have the matter out with Mr Doran and then catch 
short twelve at Marlborough Street. He had coarse features, a blunt nose, a 
convex and receding brow, tumid and protruded lips. What can't be cured, sure, 
Must be injured, sure, So I'll go to Amerikay. 

--I sir? Why, sir? 

A little wave of quiet mirth broke forth over the class of boys from the 
rector's grim smile. A tender premonition touched him of the tryst he had then 
looked forward to and, in spite of the horrible reality which lay between his 
hope of then and now, of the holy encounter he had then imagined at which 
weakness and timidity and inexperience were to fall from him. The gang made 
forays into the gardens of old maids or went down to the castle and fought a 
battle on the shaggy weed-grown rocks, coming home after it weary stragglers 
with the stale odours of the foreshore in their nostrils and the rank oils of 
the seawrack upon their hands and in their hair. 

At the moment Aunt Kate came toddling out of the supper-room, almost wringing 
her hands in despair. It was not even the way in which he thought of her. 
It’s capital we want. Come away. 

They crossed the quadrangle together without speaking. 

No escape. Tom. ” 

“Where’s your mother?” 

“She’s out at the chapel. A doorway, a room, the same room, same window. It 
was pleasant after that honour to return to the profane world of spectators 
amid nudges and significant looks. 

--That thought is not mine, he said to himself quickly. B. Patterson Finlay, on 
behalf of the railway company, expressed his deep regret at the accident. They 
were all friends of the Kearneys--musical friends or Nationalist friends; and, 
when they had played every little counter of gossip, they shook hands with one 
another all together, laughing at the crossing of so many hands, and said 
good-bye to one another in Irish. All that had been denied them had been freely 
given to him, the eldest; but the quiet glow of evening showed him in their 
faces no sign of rancour. 











Uncle Charles smoked such black twist that at last his nephew suggested to him 
to enjoy his morning smoke in a little outhouse at the end of the garden. The 
clatter of forks and spoons began again. Like a scene on some vague arras, old 
as man's weariness, the image of the seventh city of christendom was visible to 
him across the timeless air, no older nor more weary nor less patient of 
subjection than in the days of the thingmote. 

--O. The blackest protestant in the land would not speak the language I have 
heard this evening. In her home anyway she had shelter and food; she had those 
whom she had known all her life about her. Refreshed by this, Mahony chased a 
cat down a lane, but the cat escaped into a wide field. His bed was very hot 
and his face and body were very hot. He thought of it with deep awe; a terrible 
and strange sin: it thrilled him to think of it in the silence when the pens 
scraped lightly. All the descriptions of fierce love and hatred which he had 
met in books had seemed to him therefore unreal. The verses passed from his 
lips and the inarticulate cries and the unspoken brutal words rushed forth from 
his brain to force a passage. He approached the young woman and, without 
saluting, began at once to converse with her. He stood up from his desk and, 
lifting the counter as before, passed out of the office. They sat well back and 
gazed formally at the distant speck of red light which was suspended before the 
high altar. Tell no more of enchanted days. . . . . He’s a queer old 
josser!” 

“In case he asks us for our names,” I said, “let you be Murphy and I’ll 
be Smith. MacCann stood his ground and said with hostile humour: 

--Minor poets, I suppose, are above such trivial questions as the question of 
universal peace. That was all to make him laugh. An idea came into his mind and 
gave him courage. Gabriel went on more boldly: 

“I feel more strongly with every recurring year that our country has no 
tradition which does it so much honour and which it should guard so jealously 
as that of its hospitality. Now, then! There's a memory for you! 

--That's three generations--four generations, said another of the company. 

--What funnel? asked Stephen. Tell the rector, all said. It was well for her 
she had not to attend to the ladies also. The frail gay sound smote his heart 
more strongly than a trumpet blast, and, not daring to lift his eyes, he turned 
aside and gazed, as he walked, into the shadow of the tangled shrubs. In a few 
minutes the women began to come in by twos and threes, wiping their steaming 
hands in their petticoats and pulling down the sleeves of their blouses over 
their red steaming arms. Nasty Roche had big hands. There had been no mass for 
the dead in the chapel and no procession. ” Very good: that was one for Miss 
Ivors. 

“Well, I hope, Miss Morkan,” said Mr Browne, “that I’m brown enough for 
you because, you know, I’m all brown. Old father, old artificer, stand me now 
and ever in good stead. All the resident young men spoke of her as _The Madam_. 
A small ring of wonderstruck children and nursemaids would gather to watch him 
and linger even when he and uncle Charles had sat down again and were talking 
athletics and politics. 

He would fade into something impalpable under her eyes and then in a moment he 
would be transfigured. 

Goggins skipped down on to the gravel and at once returned to his place with 
good humour. Cheers for the rector! 

Hurray! Hurray! Hurray! 

The cars drove past the chapel and all caps were raised. The shock which had 
first attacked his stomach was now attacking his nerves. 

--CORPUS DOMINI NOSTRI. 

“Browne is everywhere,” said Aunt Kate, lowering her voice. . . . 

The thought slid like a cold shining rapier into his tender flesh: confession. 
This is the last and deepest and most cruel sting of the worm of conscience. 

“Well, isn’t Freddy terrible?” said Mary Jane. “Is he coming down, 
Gretta?” 

Gabriel heard his wife answer yes and saw her come down towards them. The 
peasant women stood at the half-doors, the men stood here and there. ” 

“Why didn’t you remind him?” said Mr O’Connor. 

“I am afraid you didn’t enjoy yourself at all,” said Mary Jane 
hopelessly. 

--What I have said, he began again, refers to beauty in the wider sense of the 
word, in the sense which the word has in the literary tradition. But his dark 
eyes were never fierce and his slow voice was good to listen to. He thought of 
them as men who washed their bodies briskly with cold water and wore clean cold 
linen. But I don't believe they will be flogged. Every night as I gazed up at 
the window I said softly to myself the word paralysis. 

Was that a sin for Father Arnall to be in a wax or was he allowed to get into a 
wax when the boys were idle because that made them study better or was he only 
letting on to be in a wax? It was because he was allowed, because a priest 
would know what a sin was and would not do it. Place your finger for a moment 
in the flame of a candle and you will feel the pain of fire. At other times 
they remembered his good points. He kept his hands in the side pockets of his 
belted grey suit. Her faith was bounded by her kitchen but, if she was put to 
it, she could believe also in the banshee and in the Holy Ghost. Great parcels 
of groceries and delicacies and dried fruits arrived from the city. It would 
rain for ever, noiselessly. 

--O yes, Stephen said. “She’ll be there all right. I always let her wait a 
bit. But the next day, Sunday, we were out for a walk together and when we were 
coming home he took out his cigar case and said:--By the by, Simon, I didn't 
know you smoked, or something like that. Do you know what Giraldus Cambrensis 
says about your family? 

--Is he descended from Baldwin too? asked a tall consumptive student with dark 
eyes. Dunne, railway porter, stated that as the train was about to start he 
observed a woman attempting to cross the lines. Everybody had a solution for 
the mystery and Mrs Donnelly said it was plain that Maria had left it behind 
her in the tram. He was glad of its rattling noise as it saved him from 
conversation. He might yet be able to settle down in some snug corner and live 
happily if he could only come across some good simple-minded girl with a little 
of the ready. I'm talking to you as a friend, Stephen. But then they got hot 
and then he could sleep. 

Stephen pointed to a basket which a butcher's boy had slung inverted on his 
head. No, I never heard your voice so good as it is tonight. The world, it 
seems, is drearier than even you, Lynch, imagined. Mr Holohan called to see her 
every day to have her advice on some point. She seemed to be somewhat 
disappointed at my refusal and went over quietly to the sofa where she sat down 
behind her sister. The music passed in an instant, as the first bars of sudden 
music always did, over the fantastic fabrics of his mind, dissolving them 
painlessly and noiselessly as a sudden wave dissolves the sand-built turrets of 
children. At the door Dante turned round violently and shouted down the room, 
her cheeks flushed and quivering with rage: 

--Devil out of hell! We won! We crushed him to death! Fiend! 

The door slammed behind her. They had hardly gone when Aunt Julia wandered 
slowly into the room, looking behind her at something. The pages of his 
time-worn Horace never felt cold to the touch even when his own fingers were 
cold; they were human pages and fifty years before they had been turned by the 
human fingers of John Duncan Inverarity and by his brother, William Malcolm 
Inverarity. As he walked on slowly, timing his pace to theirs, he watched 
Corley’s head which turned at every moment towards the young woman’s face 
like a big ball revolving on a pivot. Farrington’s dark wine-coloured face 
flushed darker still with anger and humiliation at having been defeated by such 
a stripling. Give Cecil Thunder a belt. It’s just kind of a friendly talk, 
you know, in a common-sense way. It was true that he wrote a literary column 
every Wednesday in _The Daily Express_, for which he was paid fifteen 
shillings. Lynch's idea. Dislike it. ” 

“Christmas-time! Christmas-time!” said Gabriel, almost trotting to the 
stairs and waving his hand to her in deprecation. Why was it that when he 
thought of Cranly he could never raise before his mind the entire image of his 
body but only the image of the head and face? Even now against the grey curtain 
of the morning he saw it before him like the phantom of a dream, the face of a 
severed head or death-mask, crowned on the brows by its stiff black upright 
hair as by an iron crown. Shame rose from his smitten heart and flooded his 
whole being. Gabriel paused for a few moments, watching her, and then said: 

“Gretta!” 

She turned away from the mirror slowly and walked along the shaft of light 
towards him. Moonan got fifth place in the Indian. Malone Chandler. He would 
speak to Gallaher about it. He wanted to say that literature was above 
politics. Shrinking from that life he turned towards the wall, making a cowl of 
the blanket and staring at the great overblown scarlet flowers of the tattered 
wallpaper. 







XXI 

He who hath glory lost, nor hath Found any soul to fellow his, Among his foes 
in scorn and wrath Holding to ancient nobleness, That high unconsortable one-- 
His love is his companion. The figure of his old master, so strangely 
re-arisen, brought back to Stephen's mind his life at Clongowes: the wide 
playgrounds, swarming with boys; the square ditch; the little cemetery off the 
main avenue of limes where he had dreamed of being buried; the firelight on the 
wall of the infirmary where he lay sick; the sorrowful face of Brother Michael. 
Such a boy is marked off from his companions by his piety, by the good example 
he shows to others. The bar was full of men and loud with the noise of tongues 
and glasses. ” 

Aunt Kate turned to Mr Browne, who was grinning at this allusion to his 
religion, and said hastily: 

“O, I don’t question the pope’s being right. The man saluted and said: 

“A prosperous New Year to you, sir. 

--Good? Yes. God's yoke was sweet and light. He’s fond of his glass of grog 
and he’s a bit of a rake, perhaps, and he’s a good sportsman. . . I say, 
Tommy, don’t make punch of that whisky: liquor up. Sometimes talks to girls 
after nightfall. He wanted to say that literature was above politics. But 
though the tears scalded his eyes and his limbs quivered with pain and fright 
he held back the hot tears and the cry that scalded his throat. 

“Now, I ask you,” she said almost testily, “where is Julia going? Julia! 
Julia! Where are you going?” 

Julia, who had gone half way down one flight, came back and announced blandly: 

“Here’s Freddy. 

“Well, I’m ashamed of you,” said Miss Ivors frankly. His mind seemed 
older than theirs: it shone coldly on their strifes and happiness and regrets 
like a moon upon a younger earth. 

--What is it for? 

--QUOD? 

--What is it for? 

Cranly turned his pale face to Stephen and said blandly and bitterly: 

--PER PAX UNIVERSALIS. Refreshed by this, Mahony chased a cat down a lane, but 
the cat escaped into a wide field. This was not altogether pleasant for him, as 
he had nearly always to make a deft guess at the meaning and shout back a 
suitable answer in the face of a high wind. On the dresser was a plate of 
sausages and white pudding and on the shelf there were eggs. It awakens, or 
ought to awaken, or induces, or ought to induce, an esthetic stasis, an ideal 
pity or an ideal terror, a stasis called forth, prolonged, and at last 
dissolved by what I call the rhythm of beauty. 

“What is the matter, Julia?” asked Aunt Kate anxiously. He pushed onward 
nervously, feigning a still greater haste and faintly conscious of the smiles 
and stares and nudges which his powdered head left in its wake. Like Ignatius 
he was lame but in his eyes burned no spark of Ignatius's enthusiasm. A long 
thin cane would have a high whistling sound and he wondered what was that pain 
like. 







XXII 

Of that so sweet imprisonment My soul, dearest, is fain-- Soft arms that woo me 
to relent And woo me to detain. It is a good odour to breathe. Soon they would 
be going home for the holidays. Let us drink to their health, wealth, long 
life, happiness and prosperity and may they long continue to hold the proud and 
self-won position which they hold in their profession and the position of 
honour and affection which they hold in our hearts. I saw that he had great 
gaps in his mouth between his yellow teeth. Then he resumed: 

--Now let us try for a moment to realize, as far as we can, the nature of that 
abode of the damned which the justice of an offended God has called into 
existence for the eternal punishment of sinners. No, no; she could not. I was 
too hairy to tell her that. Asked me was I writing poems? About whom? I asked 
her. ” 

Mr Holohan seemed to be in a hurry; he advised her to speak to Mr Fitzpatrick. 
He told us about them flaming fat devils of pigs. Mr Alleyne was said to be 
sweet on her or on her money. ” 

“O. “I forget the subject of his discourse now. She leaned lightly on his 
arm, as lightly as when she had danced with him a few hours before. Why did you 
tell me those things? 

--Thanks, said Stephen. I was still considering whether I would go away or not 
when the man came back and sat down beside us again. Whenever I’d bring in 
his soup to him there I’d find him with his breviary fallen to the floor, 
lying back in the chair and his mouth open. His blood was in revolt. He 
returned to his pipe and finally spat rudely into the grate. But what is limbo? 

--Put him back into the perambulator, Cranly, O'Keeffe called out. 

At the moment Aunt Kate came toddling out of the supper-room, almost wringing 
her hands in despair. 

--If you mean speculation, sir, said Stephen, I also am sure that there is no 
such thing as free thinking inasmuch as all thinking must be bound by its own 
laws. “Now, Joe!” 

Mr Hynes hesitated a little longer. He shoved it back and in the shadow of the 
trees Stephen saw his pale face, framed by the dark, and his large dark eyes. 
You see that it is that thing which it is and no other thing. It was an elfin 
prelude, endless and formless; and, as it grew wilder and faster, the flames 
leaping out of time, he seemed to hear from under the boughs and grasses wild 
creatures racing, their feet pattering like rain upon the leaves. What 
excitement! Jimmy was excited too; he would lose, of course. ” 

Mr Cunningham gave a qualified assent. ” 

“They say,” said Mary Jane, “we haven’t had snow like it for thirty 
years; and I read this morning in the newspapers that the snow is general all 
over Ireland. I passed out on to the road and saw by the lighted dial of a 
clock that it was ten minutes to ten. She sang _I Dreamt that I Dwelt_, and 
when she came to the second verse she sang again: 



_I dreamt that I dwelt in marble halls With vassals and serfs at my side And of 
all who assembled within those walls That I was the hope and the pride. As he 
walked on he preconsidered the terms in which he would narrate the incident to 
the boys: 

“So, I just looked at him--coolly, you know, and looked at her. You know what 
they are, I suppose?” 

“I’ve heard of them,” said Little Chandler. Weathers was showing his 
biceps muscle to the company and boasting so much that the other two had called 
on Farrington to uphold the national honour. The tone of her voice was not 
encouraging; she seemed to have spoken to me out of a sense of duty. 

The slide was shot back. 

His evenings were his own; and he pored over a ragged translation of THE COUNT 
OF MONTE CRISTO. A frightful hole he said it was. 

“How could they be anything else, Tom?” he said. But I must leave tomorrow 
night. ” 





THE DEAD 

LILY, the caretaker’s daughter, was literally run off her feet. He moved his 
head slowly to right and left and from the manager to the person on the floor, 
as if he feared to be the victim of some delusion. _ 

He paused. ” 

He was in such a fever of rage and desire that he did not hear her come from 
the window. ” 

“That’s true,” said Mr O’Connor. 

“But tell me,” said Lenehan again, “are you sure you can bring it off all 
right? You know it’s a ticklish job. He's going to be flogged by Mr Gleeson. 
But she thinks I’m a bit of class, you know. That time is gone: gone for 
ever. If they didn’t pay her to the last farthing she would make Dublin ring. 
He saw himself sitting at his table in Bray the morning after the discussion at 
the Christmas dinner table, trying to write a poem about Parnell on the back of 
one of his father's second moiety notices. But we are living in a sceptical 
and, if I may use the phrase, a thought-tormented age: and sometimes I fear 
that this new generation, educated or hypereducated as it is, will lack those 
qualities of humanity, of hospitality, of kindly humour which belonged to an 
older day. 

--A thimbleful, John, he said, just to whet your appetite. His sins trickled 
from his lips, one by one, trickled in shameful drops from his soul, festering 
and oozing like a sore, a squalid stream of vice. Then an impromptu square 
dance, the men devising original figures. She died on the instant. 

His daily life was laid out in devotional areas. ” 

“He looks quite resigned,” said my aunt. “Weren’t some of the popes--of 
course, not our present man, or his predecessor, but some of the old popes--not 
exactly. A few of the faithful still lingered praying before one of the 
side-altars or kneeling in the benches near the confessionals. 

--We go to the house of God, Mr Casey said, in all humility to pray to our 
Maker and not to hear election addresses. Mr Fitzpatrick, who did not catch the 
point at issue very quickly, seemed unable to resolve the difficulty and said 
that he would bring the matter before the Committee. No. 

At last after a fury of plunges he wrenched himself free. He loved you as only 
a God can love. Weathers said he would take a small Irish and Apollinaris. So 
long and cruel they were, though the white fattish hands were not cruel but 
gentle. 

He touched Stephen timidly at the elbow and said eagerly: 

--Do you feel how profound that is because you are a poet? 

Cranly pointed his long forefinger. 

The prefect's shoes went away. And though he trembled with cold and fright to 
think of the cruel long nails and of the high whistling sound of the cane and 
of the chill you felt at the end of your shirt when you undressed yourself yet 
he felt a feeling of queer quiet pleasure inside him to think of the white 
fattish hands, clean and strong and gentle. 

A voice said: 

--Intellectual crankery is better out of this movement than in it. . . God 
forgive me,” he added, “I thought he was the dozen of stout. He gave them 
ear only for a time but he was happy only when he was far from them, beyond 
their call, alone or in the company of phantasmal comrades. The lady who sat 
next him looked round at the deserted house once or twice and then said: 

“What a pity there is such a poor house tonight! It’s so hard on people to 
have to sing to empty benches. The cars were rolling on the gravel. Consider 
then what must be the foulness of the air of hell. 

--Would you, Cranly asked, in extreme danger, commit that particular sacrilege? 
For instance, if you lived in the penal days? 

--I cannot answer for the past, Stephen replied. The air of wealth and repose 
diffused about them seemed to comfort their neediness. Temple turned back to 
Stephen and asked: 

--Do you believe in the law of heredity? 

--Are you drunk or what are you or what are you trying to say? asked Cranly, 
facing round on him with an expression of wonder. If ever he had seen himself 
celebrant it was as in the pictures of the mass in his child's massbook, in a 
church without worshippers, save for the angel of the sacrifice, at a bare 
altar, and served by an acolyte scarcely more boyish than himself. He was 
excited and breathless. They called us all the names in the world. The five 
young men had various tastes and their tongues had been loosened. What was 
after the universe? 

Nothing. She set these on the table and invited us to take a little glass of 
wine. The veins stood out on Farrington’s forehead, and the pallor of 
Weathers’ complexion changed to peony. 

A glow of desire kindled again his soul and fired and fulfilled all his body. 

Mr Dedalus turned to uncle Charles. 

Mr Crofton sat down on a box and looked fixedly at the other bottle on the hob. 
He cared little that he was in mortal sin, that his life had grown to be a 
tissue of subterfuge and falsehood. ” 

“I often told Julia,” said Aunt Kate emphatically, “that she was simply 
thrown away in that choir. 

--Do you mean women? 

--I am not speaking of that, Cranly said in a colder tone. A feverish 
quickening of his pulses followed, and a din of meaningless words drove his 
reasoned thoughts hither and thither confusedly. 

“I could only get one cab,” he said. 

--Give me a kiss, she said. A certain pride mingled with his parents’ 
trepidation, a certain eagerness, also, to play fast and loose for the names of 
great foreign cities have at least this virtue. Dixon turned towards him, 
saying in a soft voice: 

--Did an angel speak? 

Cranly turned also and said vehemently but without anger: 

--Goggins, you're the flamingest dirty devil I ever met, do you know. I know 
how it has changed you. To discover the mode of life or of art whereby your 
spirit could express itself in unfettered freedom. He took up his pen and 
dipped it in the ink but he continued to stare stupidly at the last words he 
had written: _In no case shall the said Bernard Bodley be. Instinctively he 
turned his back more to the light lest she might see the shame that burned upon 
his forehead. Stephen felt the skin tingle and glow slightly and almost 
painlessly; and, bowing submissively, as if to meet his companion's jesting 
mood, began to recite the CONFITEOR. 







XII 

What counsel has the hooded moon Put in thy heart, my shyly sweet, Of Love in 
ancient plenilune, Glory and stars beneath his feet-- A sage that is but kith 
and kin With the comedian Capuchin? 

Believe me rather that am wise In disregard of the divine, A glory kindles in 
those eyes Trembles to starlight. 

Mr Kernan sent a letter to his office next day and remained in bed. It means 
certainly a stasis and not a kinesis. But there’s such a thing as common 
everyday politeness and gratitude. I bent down to her and PHTH! says I to her 
like that. 

Stephen, in the act of being led away, caught sight of MacCann's flushed 
blunt-featured face. People used to say that Ignatius Gallaher was wild. As he 
did not wish their last interview to be troubled by the influence of their 
ruined confessional they met in a little cakeshop near the Parkgate. The 
sergeant makes them stand in a row against the wall and hold up their plates. 

--If you mean speculation, sir, said Stephen, I also am sure that there is no 
such thing as free thinking inasmuch as all thinking must be bound by its own 
laws. ” 

“And who was the person long ago?” asked Gabriel, smiling. A dull yellow 
light brooded over the houses and the river; and the sky seemed to be 
descending. It was something to have a friend like that. . 

A sharp Ulster voice said from the bench below Stephen: 

--Are we likely to be asked questions on applied science? 

The professor began to juggle gravely with the terms pure science and applied 
science. They passed the farmhouse of the Jolly Farmer. Such a person (as his 
father agreed) was well worth knowing, even if he had not been the charming 
companion he was. The instant flashed forth like a point of light and now from 
cloud on cloud of vague circumstance confused form was veiling softly its 
afterglow. And Father Arnall had said that he need not study till the new 
glasses came. But he had not told Fleming to colour them those colours. 

“The youngster and he were great friends. She was red in the face. It was 
falling on every part of the dark central plain, on the treeless hills, falling 
softly upon the Bog of Allen and, farther westward, softly falling into the 
dark mutinous Shannon waves. God could see that he was sorry. After a silence 
of a few minutes I heard Mahony exclaim: 

“I say! Look what he’s doing!” 

As I neither answered nor raised my eyes Mahony exclaimed again: 

“I say. Decollation they call it in the gold. The sea was cold day and night: 
but it was colder at night. It was like waves. Someone had put coal on and he 
heard voices. And the bell would toll slowly. 

“O, don’t let that trouble you, Jack,” said Mr Henchy. Hom! 

He gave a loud cough of laughter, smiled broadly and tugged twice at the 
straw-coloured goatee which hung from his blunt chin. As he proceeded I noticed 
that his accent was good. And he felt the prefect's hand on his forehead; and 
he felt his forehead warm and damp against the prefect's cold damp hand. He 
told himself calmly that those words had absolutely no sense which had seemed 
to rise murmurously from the dark. ” 

Mr Hynes laughed and, shoving himself away from the mantelpiece with the aid of 
his shoulders, made ready to leave. A cut ham was exposed on a great blue dish 
while near it on a plate lay a segment of very light plum-pudding. But she 
would not do so. I was too hairy to tell her that. Soon they would be going 
home for the holidays. 

“It’s such a relief,” said Aunt Kate to Mrs Conroy, “that Gabriel is 
here. Don't I tell you he's provincial of the order now? 

--I never liked the idea of sending him to the christian brothers myself, said 
Mrs Dedalus. The attitude of rapture in sacred art, the raised and parted 
hands, the parted lips and eyes as of one about to swoon, became for him an 
image of the soul in prayer, humiliated and faint before her Creator. O come 
among the laden trees: The leaves lie thick upon the way Of memories. One human 
being had seemed to love him and he had denied her life and happiness: he had 
sentenced her to ignominy, a death of shame. 

--Do you remember, he said, when we knew each other first? The first morning we 
met you asked me to show you the way to the matriculation class, putting a very 
strong stress on the first syllable. 

He banged his pandybat down on the desk and cried: 

--Up, Fleming! Up, my boy! 

Fleming stood up slowly. But his dark eyes were never fierce and his slow voice 
was good to listen to. He wondered had he been in her thoughts as she had been 
in his. Soon he would sleep. Her father used often to hunt them in out of the 
field with his blackthorn stick; but usually little Keogh used to keep _nix_ 
and call out when he saw her father coming. 

--You are an artist, are you not, Mr Dedalus? said the dean, glancing up and 
blinking his pale eyes. Mrs Dedalus rose quickly and followed her towards the 
door. 

O, the wild rose blossoms On the little green place. ” 

“Some day you will,” said Little Chandler calmly. Then Mr Power said, point 
blank: 

“To tell you the truth, Tom, we’re going to make a retreat. ” 

“There was many a good man went to the penny-a-week school with a sod of turf 
under his oxter,” said Mr Kernan sententiously. He would fall. He had sinned 
so deeply against heaven and before God that he was not worthy to be called 
God's child. Now I knew they were true. I think it’ll be all right. ” 

“Tonight, perhaps. Where? 

--Dinner? said Mr Dedalus. “Press life. Always hurry and scurry, looking for 
copy and sometimes not finding it: and then, always to have something new in 
your stuff. 

“Therefore, I will not linger on the past. Then, with a snort of disgust, he 
shoved him violently down the steps. His soul’s companion! He thought of the 
hobbling wretches whom he had seen carrying cans and bottles to be filled by 
the barman. They walked forward in silence. ” 

The room was silent again. He was undecided about the lines from Robert 
Browning for he feared they would be above the heads of his hearers. It is the 
whole mass of those born into it. The bird call from SIEGFRIED whistled softly 
followed them from the steps of the porch. That was all to make him laugh. His 
life would be lonely too until he, too, died, ceased to exist, became a 
memory--if anyone remembered him. The King’s coming here will mean an influx 
of money into this country. The heavy lumpish phrase sank slowly out of hearing 
like a stone through a quagmire. He stood still, gazing fixedly at the head 
upon the pile of papers. It was that windless hour of dawn when madness wakes 
and strange plants open to the light and the moth flies forth silently. His 
line of life had not been the shortest distance between two points and for 
short periods he had been driven to live by his wits. Lucifer, we are told, was 
a son of the morning, a radiant and mighty angel; yet he fell: he fell and 
there fell with him a third part of the host of heaven: he fell and was hurled 
with his rebellious angels into hell. ” 

“And what about Dowling?” asked Mr M’Coy. The sea had fallen below the 
line of seawrack on the shallow side of the breakwater and already the tide was 
running out fast along the foreshore. They walked forward in silence. But how 
so quickly? By seeing or by thinking of seeing. ” 

At nine o’clock I heard my uncle’s latchkey in the halldoor. 

--What funnel? asked Stephen. QUASI PALMA EXALTATA SUM IN GADES ET QUASI 
PLANTATIO ROSAE IN JERICHO. 

--Any boys want flogging here, Father Arnall? cried the prefect of studies. The 
Laocoon interested me very much when I read it. 

A soft liquid joy like the noise of many waters flowed over his memory and he 
felt in his heart the soft peace of silent spaces of fading tenuous sky above 
the waters, of oceanic silence, of swallows flying through the sea-dusk over 
the flowing waters. 

Mr Kernan seemed to be troubled in mind. 

“I bar the candles,” said Mr Kernan, conscious of having created an effect 
on his audience and continuing to shake his head to and fro. 

--Here comes the noble Dedalus! cried a high throaty voice. Find these and you 
find the qualities of universal beauty. At last she turned towards them and 
Gabriel saw that there was colour on her cheeks and that her eyes were shining. 
” 





A very sullen-faced man stood at the corner of O’Connell Bridge waiting for 
the little Sandymount tram to take him home. 

--Haven't I? he cried. Then he said: 

--Well now, the day kept up fine after all. His cheeks were aflame; his body 
was aglow; his limbs were trembling. After the first year of married life, Mrs 
Kearney perceived that such a man would wear better than a romantic person, but 
she never put her own romantic ideas away. He sat propped up in the bed by 
pillows and the little colour in his puffy cheeks made them resemble warm 
cinders. 

He turned to appease the fierce longings of his heart before which everything 
else was idle and alien. As a boy he had imagined the reins by which horses are 
driven as slender silken bands and it shocked him to feel at Stradbrooke the 
greasy leather of harness. They said: pick, pack, pock, puck: little drops of 
water in a fountain slowly falling in the brimming bowl. He thought of how she 
who lay beside him had locked in her heart for so many years that image of her 
lover’s eyes when he had told her that he did not wish to live. 

APRIL 3. Do you know what we call a notion like that in Roscommon? 

--Hoosh! Blast you! Cranly cried, clapping his hands. 

--Saint Augustine says that about unbaptized children going to hell, Temple 
answered, because he was a cruel old sinner too. 

“I’m so sorry,” she continued, “that I’ve nothing in the house to 
offer you. His whole body was shaking with fright, his arm was shaking and his 
crumpled burning livid hand shook like a loose leaf in the air. 

Stephen followed also with his ears the accents and intervals of the priest's 
voice as he spoke gravely and cordially of indifferent themes, the vacation 
which had just ended, the colleges of the order abroad, the transference of 
masters. My first cousin, Fonsy Davin, was stripped to his buff that day 
minding cool for the Limericks but he was up with the forwards half the time 
and shouting like mad. His unrest issued from him like a wave of sound: and on 
the tide of flowing music the ark was journeying, trailing her cables of 
lanterns in her wake. He kept the pair in view until he had seen them climbing 
the stairs of the Donnybrook tram; then he turned about and went back the way 
he had come. In a quiet bystreet a German band of five players in faded 
uniforms and with battered brass instruments was playing to an audience of 
street arabs and leisurely messenger boys. 

--Yes, MacCullagh and I, he said. Every sin would then come forth from its 
lurking place, the most rebellious against the divine will and the most 
degrading to our poor corrupt nature, the tiniest imperfection and the most 
heinous atrocity. 



VISIT, WE BESEECH THEE, O LORD, THIS HABITATION AND DRIVE AWAY FROM IT ALL THE 
SNARES OF THE ENEMY. She looked at herself in profile and readjusted a hairpin 
above her ear. ” 

“I’m very much obliged to you, old man,” said the invalid. The cattle 
which had seemed so beautiful in the country on sunny days revolted him and he 
could not even look at the milk they yielded. He had told me stories about the 
catacombs and about Napoleon Bonaparte, and he had explained to me the meaning 
of the different ceremonies of the Mass and of the different vestments worn by 
the priest. The vast cycle of starry life bore his weary mind outward to its 
verge and inward to its centre, a distant music accompanying him outward and 
inward. How they will rage and fume to think that they have lost the bliss of 
heaven for the dross of earth, for a few pieces of metal, for vain honours, for 
bodily comforts, for a tingling of the nerves. 

The second pain which will afflict the souls of the damned in hell is the pain 
of conscience. And one day Boyle had said that an elephant had two tuskers 
instead of two tusks and that was why he was called Tusker Boyle but some 
fellows called him Lady Boyle because he was always at his nails, paring them. 
Perhaps a wild rose might be like those colours and he remembered the song 
about the wild rose blossoms on the little green place. 

He fell as fall the mighty ones, Nobly undaunted to the last, And death has now 
united him With Erin’s heroes of the past. On Friday confession will be heard 
all the afternoon after beads. 

No escape. 

“We were waiting for him to come home with the money. Evening had fallen. A 
rim of the young moon cleft the pale waste of skyline, the rim of a silver hoop 
embedded in grey sand; and the tide was flowing in fast to the land with a low 
whisper of her waves, islanding a few last figures in distant pools. 

Mr Dedalus put up his eyeglass and, staring down at him, said quietly and 
kindly: 

--What are you laughing at, you little puppy, you? 

The servants entered and placed the dishes on the table. I hope we’ll ‘eet 
again. ” 

“Why so?” 

“He asked me who the nominators were; and I told him. Only at times, in the 
pauses of his desire, when the luxury that was wasting him gave room to a 
softer languor, the image of Mercedes traversed the background of his memory. 
When he had drunk he smacked his lips decisively, set down his glass and said: 

“No blooming fear of that, my boy. He knew that the prostrate creatures down 
by the wall were watching him and wished him gone. Hell is Roman, like the 
walls of the Romans, strong and ugly. Neither he nor she had had any such 
adventure before and neither was conscious of any incongruity. This, it seemed, 
was the only love and that the only hate his soul would harbour. He read it not 
aloud, but moving his lips as a priest does when he reads the prayers 
_Secreto_. 

I held a florin tightly in my hand as I strode down Buckingham Street towards 
the station. Only louder. 

To remember that and the white look of the lavatory made him feel cold and then 
hot. 

Lynch nodded. . 
