all right. Now time lay between: the oils of ordination would never anoint his 
body. 

As he sat there, living over his life with her and evoking alternately the two 
images in which he now conceived her, he realised that she was dead, that she 
had ceased to exist, that she had become a memory. She had no longer any grace 
of attitude but Gabriel’s eyes were still bright with happiness. I had riches 
too great to count, could boast Of a high ancestral name, But I also dreamt, 
which pleased me most, That you loved me still the same. Do I know?” 

She did not answer at once. 

--Baldhead, Cranly repeated, sucking at a crevice in his teeth. 

As they crossed the hall a man of dwarfish stature came towards them. 

While sweetly, gently, secretly, The flowery bells of morn are stirred And the 
wise choirs of faery Begin (innumerous!) to be heard. He tried to count them 
before all their darting quivering bodies passed: six, ten, eleven: and 
wondered were they odd or even in number. 

The Priest was silent. Where? 

--Dinner? said Mr Dedalus. Well, I suppose we had better, what? 

--Some place that's not too dear, said Mrs Dedalus. You wouldn't see the sign 
of a christian house along the road or hear a sound. 

Suck was a queer word. Though nobody spoke to him of the affair after class he 
could feel about him a vague general malignant joy. In the dark of my room I 
imagined that I saw again the heavy grey face of the paralytic. 

--Quite so, said the dean, you have certainly hit the nail on the head. “But 
it’s so sickening. ” 

“O, I’d give anything to hear Caruso sing,” said Mary Jane. I was still 
considering whether I would go away or not when the man came back and sat down 
beside us again. She set these on the table and invited us to take a little 
glass of wine. He watched her leave the room in the hope that she would look 
back at him, but he was disappointed. What was the right answer to the 
question? He had given two and still Wells laughed. It is a form: nothing else. 
God was almighty. DIEU was the French for God and that was God's name too; and 
when anyone prayed to God and said DIEU then God knew at once that it was a 
French person that was praying. But, though there were different names for God 
in all the different languages in the world and God understood what all the 
people who prayed said in their different languages, still God remained always 
the same God and God's real name was God. I will set right my accounts. I am 
sure you do. . ?” I said. Not now. Have read little and understood less. Then 
she said I would come back to faith because I had a restless mind. On the very 
moment John MacHale, who had been arguing and arguing against it, stood up and 
shouted out with the voice of a lion: ‘_Credo!_’” 

“_I believe!_” said Mr Fogarty. They saluted coldly; and the lover’s eyes 
rested for a second or two on a thick bulldog face and a pair of thick short 
arms. But he felt better now than before. She did not feel in the least hungry 
and she had already overstayed her time. 

“Well, I hope, Miss Morkan,” said Mr Browne, “that I’m brown enough for 
you because, you know, I’m all brown. Stephen blushed under their eyes and 
said: 

--I do not. It was a raw spring morning and his eyes were still smarting and 
weak. It is very difficult. First they were so cold to get into. Set that 
before you as your first aim. Then, little by little, you will see your way. At 
the words MY MOST GRIEVOUS FAULT he ceased, breathless. The soul of every human 
being that has ever existed, the souls of all those who shall yet be born, all 
the sons and daughters of Adam, all are assembled on that supreme day. They 
proceeded towards it with linked arms, singing _Cadet Roussel_ in chorus, 
stamping their feet at every: 

_“Ho! Ho! Hohé, vraiment!”_ 

They got into a rowboat at the slip and made out for the American’s yacht. 

Mrs Kearney brought her daughter over to them, and talked to them amiably. Ask 
Dedalus. Who is the greatest writer, Dedalus? 

Stephen noted the mockery in the question and said: 

--Of prose do you mean? 

--Yes. 

The whisper ceased and he knew then clearly that his own soul had sinned in 
thought and word and deed wilfully through his own body. ” 

“Who did you get?” asked Mr Lyons. 

“_Beannacht libh_,” cried Miss Ivors, with a laugh, as she ran down the 
staircase. It is a terrible sin. But, he told his hearers, the text had seemed 
to him specially adapted for the guidance of those whose lot it was to lead the 
life of the world and who yet wished to lead that life not in the manner of 
worldlings. I will set right my accounts. ” 

“And his sixpence. Mr Holohan did not know what it meant. Mrs Kearney’s 
anger began to flutter in her cheek and she had all she could do to keep from 
asking: 

“And who is the _Cometty_ pray?” 

But she knew that it would not be ladylike to do that: so she was silent. 

--Sit over, she said. They had a different father and mother. 

In one of the benches near the pulpit sat Mr Cunningham and Mr Kernan. 

“Why, what was wonderful about Johnny?” asked Mr Browne. There's plenty of 
money to be made in a big commercial city. 

--Depends on the practice. 

--Yes, father? 

--Is your lazy bitch of a brother gone out yet? 

--Yes, father. 

--Do you disbelieve then? 

--I neither believe in it nor disbelieve in it, Stephen answered. He went into 
Capel Street and walked along towards the City Hall. But he could not: and so 
he longed for the play and study and prayers to be over and to be in bed. It 
was a quarter to nine. Perhaps she would not be sorry to see him fail in his 
speech. But you could not have a green rose. But why was he then against the 
priests? Because Dante must be right then. The mimic warfare of the evening 
became at last as wearisome to me as the routine of school in the morning 
because I wanted real adventures to happen to myself. Here was congenial ground 
for all. Water? Say when. ” 

Little Chandler allowed his whisky to be very much diluted. ” 

The raisins and almonds and figs and apples and oranges and chocolates and 
sweets were now passed about the table and Aunt Julia invited all the guests to 
have either port or sherry. Mr M’Coy said: 

“Father Tom Burke, that was the boy!” 

“O, Father Tom Burke,” said Mr Cunningham, “that was a born orator. An 
irregular musketry of applause escorted her also as far as the piano and then, 
as Mary Jane seated herself on the stool, and Aunt Julia, no longer smiling, 
half turned so as to pitch her voice fairly into the room, gradually ceased. He 
would say, alluding to Aunt Kate and Aunt Julia: “Ladies and Gentlemen, the 
generation which is now on the wane among us may have had its faults but for my 
part I think it had certain qualities of hospitality, of humour, of humanity, 
which the new and very serious and hypereducated generation that is growing up 
around us seems to me to lack. A thing like that had been done before by 
somebody in history, by some great person whose head was in the books of 
history. The boy that held the censer had swung it lifted by the middle chain 
to keep the coals lighting. But it is too late: the just turn away from the 
wretched damned souls which now appear before the eyes of all in their hideous 
and evil character. It made him afraid to think of how it was. Both she and 
Julia had always seemed a little proud of their serious and matronly sister. 
Her photograph stood before the pierglass. 

They both kissed Gabriel frankly. We can't speak here. Gabriel says everyone 
wears them on the continent. She was standing right under the dusty fanlight 
and the flame of the gas lit up the rich bronze of her hair, which he had seen 
her drying at the fire a few days before. The first tenor and the contralto, 
however, brought down the house. 

When they came out into Grafton Street, Mr Power whistled for an outsider. The 
mirth, which in the beginning of the evening had seemed to him false and 
trivial, was like a soothing air to him, passing gaily by his senses, hiding 
from other eyes the feverish agitation of his blood while through the circling 
of the dancers and amid the music and laughter her glance travelled to his 
corner, flattering, taunting, searching, exciting his heart. The man listened 
to the clicking of the machine for a few minutes and then set to work to finish 
his copy. Corley was the son of an inspector of police and he had inherited his 
father’s frame and gait. He walked with his hands by his sides, holding 
himself erect and swaying his head from side to side. By Christ, I’ll go 
myself and see what they’re like. “Give us that thing you wrote--do you 
remember? Have you got it on you?” 

“O, ay!” said Mr Henchy. Did you ever hear that, Crofton? Listen to this 
now: splendid thing. By hell, I saw that at once. ’ And are we going to 
insult the man when he comes over here on a friendly visit? Eh? Isn’t that 
right, Crofton?” 

Mr Crofton nodded his head. ” 

Mr O’Connor shook his head in sympathy, and the old man fell silent, gazing 
into the fire. I was still considering whether I would go away or not when the 
man came back and sat down beside us again. 

Her image accompanied me even in places the most hostile to romance. 

Fleming knelt down, squeezing his hands under his armpits, his face contorted 
with pain; but Stephen knew how hard his hands were because Fleming was always 
rubbing rosin into them. You'd be afraid to open your lips. 

--Afraid? 

--Ay. No sound was to be heard; but he knew that all around him life was about 
to awaken in common noises, hoarse voices, sleepy prayers. 

Stephen smiled at the manner of this confidence and, when Moynihan had passed, 
turned again to meet Cranly's eyes. God and the Blessed Virgin were too far 
from him: God was too great and stern and the Blessed Virgin too pure and holy. 
For him! For him! 

He sprang from the bed, the reeking odour pouring down his throat, clogging and 
revolting his entrails. All day he had thought of nothing but their 
leave-taking on the steps of the tram at Harold's Cross, the stream of moody 
emotions it had made to course through him and the poem he had written about 
it. Forty days and forty nights the rain would fall till the waters covered the 
face of the earth. 

It might be. Isn't that so, captain? 

--What are you reading now, captain? Dixon asked. THE BRIDE OF LAMMERMOOR? 

--I love old Scott, the flexible lips said, I think he writes something lovely. 





Polly sat for a little time on the side of the bed, crying. Miss Ivors promptly 
took his hand in a warm grasp and said in a soft friendly tone: 

“Of course, I was only joking. 

It was always a great affair, the Misses Morkan’s annual dance. At the foot 
of the steps they halted and Stephen took a packet of cigarettes from his 
pocket and offered it to his companion. 

Just as they were naming their poisons who should come in but Higgins! Of 
course he had to join in with the others. He murmured: 

--I. On Sunday nights there would often be a reunion in Mrs Mooney’s front 
drawing-room. His cheekbones also gave his face a harsh character; but there 
was no harshness in the eyes which, looking at the world from under their tawny 
eyebrows, gave the impression of a man ever alert to greet a redeeming instinct 
in others but often disappointed. His soul was soaring in an air beyond the 
world and the body he knew was purified in a breath and delivered of 
incertitude and made radiant and commingled with the element of the spirit. His 
soul was soaring in an air beyond the world and the body he knew was purified 
in a breath and delivered of incertitude and made radiant and commingled with 
the element of the spirit. A petticoat string dangled to the floor. 

--But you have not answered my question, said Lynch. He waited in fear, his 
soul pining within him, praying silently that death might not touch his brow as 
he passed over the threshold, that the fiends that inhabit darkness might not 
be given power over him. By grace of these two articles of clothing, he said, a 
man could always pass muster. There's that son of mine there not half my age 
and I'm a better man than he is any day of the week. 

He inclined his head, closed his eyes, and, licking his lips profusely, began 
to speak with the voice of the hotel keeper. She brought them up to his 
bedroom, the air of which was impregnated with a personal odour, and gave them 
chairs at the fire. Then, at her sister’s bidding, she filled out the sherry 
into the glasses and passed them to us. 

“You are a very generous person, Gabriel,” she said. 

--You don't care whether he was a heretic or not? said Nash. Don't talk to him 
or look at him. 

Bah! he had done well to leave the room in disdain. 

“Ah,” he said, “you may say what you like. A tiny light twinkled at the 
pierhead where the ship was entering: and he saw a multitude of people gathered 
by the waters' edge to see the ship that was entering their harbour. Want to 
get them off my chest. 

A long curving gallery. He turned from the page and tried to hush it: but it 
would not be hushed. Then gave me recipe for what he calls RISOTTO ALLA 
BERGAMASCA. A small gold coin shone in the palm. For a full hour he had paced 
up and down, waiting: but he could wait no longer. 

--I don't care a damn about you, Cranly, answered Temple, moving out of reach 
of the uplifted stave and pointing at Stephen. ” 

“He had a strong face,” said Mr Kernan. When he stood up he was tall and of 
great bulk. 

--Of course, said Lynch. He had to confess, to speak out in words what he had 
done and thought, sin after sin. At those moments the soft speeches of Claude 
Melnotte rose to his lips and eased his unrest. The soul of every human being 
that has ever existed, the souls of all those who shall yet be born, all the 
sons and daughters of Adam, all are assembled on that supreme day. I looked 
humbly at the great jars that stood like eastern guards at either side of the 
dark entrance to the stall and murmured: 

“No, thank you. I think it’ll be all right. ” 

At that moment the hall-door was opened and Mr Browne came in from the 
doorstep, laughing as if his heart would break. ” 

“Allow me,” said Mr Cunningham positively, “it was _Lux upon Lux_. Mrs 
Kearney was now beginning to be alarmed. There was something she didn’t like 
in the look of things and Mr Fitzpatrick’s vacant smile irritated her very 
much. There were holly and ivy round the pierglass and holly and ivy, green and 
red, twined round the chandeliers. There were red holly and green ivy round the 
old portraits on the walls. The curate, who was standing beside the table, 
nodded his red head towards the victor and said with stupid familiarity: 

“Ah! that’s the knack!” 

“What the hell do you know about it?” said Farrington fiercely, turning on 
the man. The day had grown sultry, and in the windows of the grocers’ shops 
musty biscuits lay bleaching. 

Stephen paused and, though his companion did not speak, felt that his words had 
called up around them a thought-enchanted silence. “I think Christmas is 
never really Christmas unless we have the snow on the ground. ” 

“John of Tuam,” repeated Mr Cunningham, “was the man. “Must I have a 
candle?” 

“O yes,” said Mr Cunningham. 

“No, damn it all,” said Mr Kernan sensibly, “I draw the line there. 







XXVI 

Thou leanest to the shell of night, Dear lady, a divining ear. 

--I wouldn't, said Heron, damn me if I would. And to inquire what kind of 
beauty is proper to each of the various arts. 

He passed along the narrow dark corridor, passing little doors that were the 
doors of the rooms of the community. “Five times in one day is a little bit. 
. ” 

“It’s when it’s all over that you’ll miss him,” said my aunt. ” 

“O, Mr D’Arcy,” said Aunt Kate, “now that was a great fib to tell. 

“O, I know about the infallibility of the Pope. 

--Good day, sir, said Stephen. 

A sudden swift hiss fell from the windows above him and he knew that the 
electric lamps had been switched on in the reader's room. When their faces had 
flushed with the struggle they drew apart, panting. He bawled upstairs: 

“Ada! Ada!” 

His wife was a little sharp-faced woman who bullied her husband when he was 
sober and was bullied by him when he was drunk. Ever since the message of 
summons had come for him from the director his mind had struggled to find the 
meaning of the message; and, during the long restless time he had sat in the 
college parlour waiting for the director to come in, his eyes had wandered from 
one sober picture to another around the walls and his mind wandered from one 
guess to another until the meaning of the summons had almost become clear. 
Then, just as he was wishing that some unforeseen cause might prevent the 
director from coming, he had heard the handle of the door turning and the swish 
of a soutane. 

He moved the umbrella in indication and tittered again. 

“I am a little,” she answered. A certain pride mingled with his parents’ 
trepidation, a certain eagerness, also, to play fast and loose for the names of 
great foreign cities have at least this virtue. 





THE BOARDING HOUSE 

MRS MOONEY was a butcher’s daughter. He did not seem to have heard the 
invitation. The tablecloth was damp and limp. 

Fleming said: 

--Are you not well? 

He did not know; and Fleming said: 

--Get back into bed. 

--To wit? said Lynch. The old man was a nimble walker in spite of his corns and 
often ten or twelve miles of the road were covered. His blood was in revolt. 
When he reported these dialogues he aspirated the first letter of his name 
after the manner of Florentines. My aunt said: 

“I’m afraid you may put off your bazaar for this night of Our Lord. We can 
have a little music and----” 

“Thanks awfully, old chap,” said Ignatius Gallaher, “I’m sorry we 
didn’t meet earlier. And inquisitive! AND WHAT PART DOES STEPHEN TAKE, MR 
DEDALUS? AND WILL STEPHEN NOT SING, MR DEDALUS? Your governor was staring at 
her through that eyeglass of his for all he was worth so that I think the old 
man has found you out too. But that was not why 

A voice from far out on the playground cried: 

--All in! 

And other voices cried: 

--All in! All in! 

During the writing lesson he sat with his arms folded, listening to the slow 
scraping of the pens. 

She was alone and still, gazing out to sea; and when she felt his presence and 
the worship of his eyes her eyes turned to him in quiet sufferance of his gaze, 
without shame or wantonness. A smiler. She looked a long time at a smiling 
picture that was set in it and said musingly: 

--The beautiful Mabel Hunter! 

A ringletted girl stood on tiptoe to peer at the picture and said softly: 

--What is she in, mud? 

--In a pantomime, love. He was a shabby stooped little drunkard with a white 
face and a white moustache and white eyebrows, pencilled above his little eyes, 
which were pink-veined and raw; and all day long he sat in the bailiff’s 
room, waiting to be put on a job. He was not without culture. One by one they 
were all becoming shades. Then a man from Belfast bought the field and built 
houses in it--not like their little brown houses but bright brick houses with 
shining roofs. People would treat her with respect then. She shook hands a 
moment after and, in going away, said she hoped I would do what I said. The 
poison tongue of Satan had done its work. I took my seat in a third-class 
carriage of a deserted train. Now, then! What age do you think I am? And I 
remember seeing your grandfather in his red coat riding out to hounds. 

The two men went along some tortuous passages and up a dark staircase and came 
to a secluded room where one of the stewards was uncorking bottles for a few 
gentlemen. 

He got up on the car. I’ll follow,” called out Gabriel from the dark. 
I’ll go over and talk to her and you can pass by. He’s the man. ” 

We said nothing further to each other. . 

A sharp Ulster voice said from the bench below Stephen: 

--Are we likely to be asked questions on applied science? 

The professor began to juggle gravely with the terms pure science and applied 
science. Thick among the tufts of rank stiff growth lay battered canisters and 
clots and coils of solid excrement. A faint marshlight struggling upwards from 
all the ordure through the bristling grey-green weeds. But Corley’s brow was 
soon smooth again. 

The prefect of the chapel prayed above his head and his memory knew the 
responses: 



O Lord open our lips And our mouths shall announce Thy praise. Coming round 
too. The work is going ahead there too. 

--Lynch is awake, said Cranly. 

A glow of desire kindled again his soul and fired and fulfilled all his body. 
“I’d love to see Galway again. ” 

“You can go if you like,” said Gabriel coldly. 

“It keeps coming like from down in my throat; sickening thing. 

--I have a book at home, said Stephen, in which I have written down questions 
which are more amusing than yours were. A penitent emerged from the farther 
side of the box. He let it rebound twice or thrice to his hand and struck it 
strongly and swiftly towards the base of the alley, exclaiming in answer to its 
thud: 

--Your soul! 

Stephen stood with Lynch till the score began to rise. He knew the inner side 
of all affairs and was fond of delivering final judgments. As he was passing 
out the chief clerk looked at him inquiringly. Freddy Malins also took a stalk 
of celery and ate it with his pudding. 

“O, Mr Conroy,” said Lily to Gabriel when she opened the door for him, 
“Miss Kate and Miss Julia thought you were never coming. 

Mary Jane gazed after her, a moody puzzled expression on her face, while Mrs 
Conroy leaned over the banisters to listen for the hall-door. 

He looked at it without anger; for, though sloth of the body and of the soul 
crept over it like unseen vermin, over the shuffling feet and up the folds of 
the cloak and around the servile head, it seemed humbly conscious of its 
indignity. 

--To wit? said Lynch. Mr Holohan began to pace up and down the room, in order 
to cool himself for he felt his skin on fire. ” 

Freddy Malins, who was nearing the climax of his story, waved the offer aside 
impatiently but Mr Browne, having first called Freddy Malins’ attention to a 
disarray in his dress, filled out and handed him a full glass of lemonade. Both 
of them kissed Gabriel’s wife, said she must be perished alive and asked was 
Gabriel with her. Her photograph stood before the pierglass. 

Every morning I lay on the floor in the front parlour watching her door. 

--Static therefore, said Stephen. At the foot of the steps they halted and 
Stephen took a packet of cigarettes from his pocket and offered it to his 
companion. There was a good deal of confused talk, and then Mr Browne got into 
the cab. He stretched his arm wearily towards the foot of the bed, groping with 
his hand in the pockets of the coat that hung there. Miss Healy stood in front 
of him, talking and laughing. 

It was always a great affair, the Misses Morkan’s annual dance. Mr Tate, the 
English master, pointed his finger at him and said bluntly: 

--This fellow has heresy in his essay. The man answered that he knew nothing 
about them, that he had made a faithful copy. A gentle kick from the tall boy 
in the bench behind urged Stephen to ask a difficult question. To retrieve the 
consequences of that sin the Only Begotten Son of God came down to earth, lived 
and suffered and died a most painful death, hanging for three hours on the 
cross. 

The slide was shot back. He longed to cry to her from his soul, to crush her 
body against his, to overmaster her. 

He saw the rector sitting at a desk writing. He has gone to complain. He 
allowed himself to think that in certain circumstances he would rob his bank 
but, as these circumstances never arose, his life rolled out evenly--an 
adventureless tale. His friends bowed to his opinions and considered that his 
face was like Shakespeare’s. He had been a clerk in the Midland Railway, a 
canvasser for advertisements for _The Irish Times_ and for _The Freeman’s 
Journal_, a town traveller for a coal firm on commission, a private inquiry 
agent, a clerk in the office of the Sub-Sheriff and he had recently become 
secretary to the City Coroner. He went from country to country in the east, 
from Africa to India, from India to Japan, baptizing the people. White roses 
and red roses: those were beautiful colours to think of. How simple and 
beautiful was life after all! And life lay all before him. The devil has led 
you astray. Whatever he had heard or read of the craft of jesuits he had put 
aside frankly as not borne out by his own experience. His masters, even when 
they had not attracted him, had seemed to him always intelligent and serious 
priests, athletic and high-spirited prefects. Flames burst forth from his skull 
like a corolla, shrieking like voices: 

--Hell! Hell! Hell! Hell! Hell! 

Voices spoke near him: 

--On hell. 

--I suppose he rubbed it into you well. But Erin, list, his spirit may Rise, 
like the Phœnix from the flames, When breaks the dawning of the day, 

The day that brings us Freedom’s reign. ” 

Mr Power stood up. 

“Quite right, Gabriel, quite right,” she said. 

The candles on the high altar had been extinguished but the fragrance of 
incense still floated down the dim nave. 

--It's a pretty old air, said Mr Dedalus, twirling the points of his moustache. 
" Ovid, Metamorphoses, VIII. The grey winds, the cold winds are blowing Where I 
go. A little hand-mirror hung above the washstand and during the day a 
white-shaded lamp stood as the sole ornament of the mantelpiece. Though he had 
heard his father say that Mike Flynn had put some of the best runners of modern 
times through his hands Stephen often glanced at his trainer's flabby 
stubble-covered face, as it bent over the long stained fingers through which he 
rolled his cigarette, and with pity at the mild lustreless blue eyes which 
would look up suddenly from the task and gaze vaguely into the blue distance 
while the long swollen fingers ceased their rolling and grains and fibres of 
tobacco fell back into the pouch. In the dark of my room I imagined that I saw 
again the heavy grey face of the paralytic. In these sheets a sentence was 
inscribed from time to time and, in an ironical moment, the headline of an 
advertisement for _Bile Beans_ had been pasted on to the first sheet. Of course 
she had to work hard, both in the house and at business. Mr Browne could go 
back farther still, to the old Italian companies that used to come to 
Dublin--Tietjens, Ilma de Murzka, Campanini, the great Trebelli, Giuglini, 
Ravelli, Aramburo. The man answered that he knew nothing about them, that he 
had made a faithful copy. . _ Go on! What day? _‘Hardly had the day 
dawned’. . rrm. . . . 

He felt his great body again aching for the comfort of the public-house. 

--Byron, of course, answered Stephen. 

“Really,” she said archly, “he is very attentive. 

Mary Jane laughed at her tone. The leaves--they do not sigh at all When the 
year takes them in the fall. The three men pushed past the whining 
match-sellers at the door and formed a little party at the corner of the 
counter. What music? The music came nearer and he recalled the words, the words 
of Shelley's fragment upon the moon wandering companionless, pale for 
weariness. The affair would be sure to be talked of and his employer would be 
certain to hear of it. The cat escaped once more and Mahony began to throw 
stones at the wall she had escaladed. He moved his head slowly to right and 
left and from the manager to the person on the floor, as if he feared to be the 
victim of some delusion. . do the other thing. 

--Can you not think of the other way? he said. Still they were all different 
places that had different names. A crocodile seized the child. 

“Why, Gretta?” he asked. ” 

“How do you mean, Mr Cotter?” asked my aunt. 

“Yes,” said Mr Cunningham. He waited till all in the chapel had knelt and 
every least noise was still. He halted under a tree and allowed the rhythm to 
die away. He was not in Dublin at the time of the accident as he had arrived 
only that morning from Rotterdam. That's the real Ally Daly. Did you know? 

--Is it? Stephen said vaguely. I protest I did. And you will promise God now 
that by His holy grace you will never offend Him any more by that wicked sin. 
” 

Mr Cunningham laughed. . . ” 

I crammed my mouth with stirabout for fear I might give utterance to my anger. 
His deep raucous voice had thrilled them as it uttered the word of belief and 
submission. He did not like to say even to himself that her face was no longer 
beautiful but he knew that it was no longer the face for which Michael Furey 
had braved death. They had five children. Do you twig?” 

“Ah, poor Joe is a decent skin,” said Mr O’Connor. 

--But do you know, Temple went on, what I think of you and of myself compared 
together? 

--Out with it, Temple! the stout student cried from the steps. 

“That so, John?” 

“Yes. 

--Adam and Eve, my dear boys, were, as you know, our first parents, and you 
will remember that they were created by God in order that the seats in heaven 
left vacant by the fall of Lucifer and his rebellious angels might be filled 
again. He liked to sit near him at the fire, looking up at his dark fierce 
face. 

The Priest was silent. 

Moynihan's voice called from behind in echo to a distant bell: 

--Closing time, gents! 

The entrance hall was crowded and loud with talk. He had sinned. And above all 
it had pleased him to fill the second place in those dim scenes of his 
imagining. ” 

“Neither did I,” said Mr Browne. Ignatius Gallaher watched him for a few 
moments and then said: 

“If ever it occurs, you may bet your bottom dollar there’ll be no mooning 
and spooning about it. I mean to marry money. He did not believe me and said he 
was sure I must have one. ” 

Everyone laughed again: but Mr Kernan was somewhat indignant still. 

“You don’t know what’s good for you, my boy,” said Ignatius Gallaher. 
The fog had begun to chill him and he wondered could he touch Pat in 
O’Neill’s. Its rays burned up the world, consumed the hearts of men and 
angels: the rays from the rose that was her wilful heart. His hands clenched 
convulsively and his teeth set together as he suffered the agony of its 
penetration. He wandered up and down the dark slimy streets peering into the 
gloom of lanes and doorways, listening eagerly for any sound. His heart swelled 
with fury and, when he thought of the woman in the big hat who had brushed 
against him and said _Pardon!_ his fury nearly choked him. He was well 
informed. 

The rain-laden trees of the avenue evoked in him, as always, memories of the 
girls and women in the plays of Gerhart Hauptmann; and the memory of their pale 
sorrows and the fragrance falling from the wet branches mingled in a mood of 
quiet joy. He had been cast for it on account of his stature and grave manners 
for he was now at the end of his second year at Belvedere and in number two. He 
could not have carried on a comedy of deception with her; he could not have 
lived with her openly. 

“Well, drive bang up against Trinity College gates,” said Mr Browne, “and 
then we’ll tell you where to go. 

He moved with a shambling gait round the group and spoke to Stephen. Stephen 
felt the skin tingle and glow slightly and almost painlessly; and, bowing 
submissively, as if to meet his companion's jesting mood, began to recite the 
CONFITEOR. He felt his whole body hot and confused in a moment. When he went in 
by the side-door he found the kitchen empty and the kitchen fire nearly out. 
And now she had nobody to protect her. That was the way a rat felt, slimy and 
damp and cold. 

His mother had a nicer smell than his father. A full hour had passed since his 
father had gone in with Dan Crosby, the tutor, to find out for him something 
about the university. The faint murmur began again. His glossy black hair was 
parted in the middle and brushed in a long curve behind his ears where it 
curled slightly beneath the groove left by his hat. He said that when boys were 
that kind they ought to be whipped and well whipped. He would love his 
neighbour. To mortify the taste he practised strict habits at table, observed 
to the letter all the fasts of the church and sought by distraction to divert 
his mind from the savours of different foods. 

They had reached the canal bridge and, turning from their course, went on by 
the trees. 



He took up his knife and fork again in good humour and set to eating, saying to 
Mr Casey: 

--Let us have the story, John. But the nightshade of his friend's listlessness 
seemed to be diffusing in the air around him a tenuous and deadly exhalation 
and he found himself glancing from one casual word to another on his right or 
left in stolid wonder that they had been so silently emptied of instantaneous 
sense until every mean shop legend bound his mind like the words of a spell and 
his soul shrivelled up sighing with age as he walked on in a lane among heaps 
of dead language. 

Father Arnall came in and the Latin lesson began and he remained still, leaning 
on the desk with his arms folded. MAY THY HOLY ANGELS DWELL HEREIN TO PRESERVE 
US IN PEACE AND MAY THY BLESSINGS BE ALWAYS UPON US THROUGH CHRIST OUR LORD. Mr 
Dedalus took a bone from his plate and tore some meat from it with his teeth, 
saying: 

--Before he was killed, you mean. ” 

“But Mr Shelley said, sir----” 

“_Mr Shelley said, sir. ” 

“Well, glue or starch,” said Gabriel, “the old gentleman had a horse by 
the name of Johnny. ” 

“Good-night, Mr D’Arcy. 

“That’s what the woman we had in to wash him said. 

He had not even remembered rightly Nash's line. O come among the laden trees: 
The leaves lie thick upon the way Of memories. 

--Really, Simon, you should not speak that way before Stephen. ” 

“How dull you must find it,” said Little Chandler, “after all the other 
places you’ve seen!” 

“Well,” said Ignatius Gallaher, “it’s a relaxation to come over here, 
you know. ” 

“Hm,” said Mr Cunningham. “I remember hearing of old Parkinson but he’s 
too far back for me. He’s a clever chap, too, with the pen. He’s fond of 
his glass of grog and he’s a bit of a rake, perhaps, and he’s a good 
sportsman. We’ll come here one of these nights and talk it over. ” 

She saw him to the door. 

“I am afraid you didn’t enjoy yourself at all,” said Mary Jane 
hopelessly. The grave and cordial voice went on easily with its tale and in the 
pauses Stephen felt bound to set it on again with respectful questions. That 
was because he was thinking of his own father. Then she said suddenly: 

“O, Mr Conroy, will you come for an excursion to the Aran Isles this summer? 
We’re going to stay there a whole month. That was he: and he read down the 
page again. 

He offended the majesty of God by the sinful thought of one instant and God 
cast him out of heaven into hell for ever. He told his fingers to hurry up. 
Then he paused to judge. . . . . Poor James!” 

“The Lord have mercy on his soul!” said my aunt. 

Eliza took out her handkerchief and wiped her eyes with it. B. Patterson 
Finlay, on behalf of the railway company, expressed his deep regret at the 
accident. The company had always taken every precaution to prevent people 
crossing the lines except by the bridges, both by placing notices in every 
station and by the use of patent spring gates at level crossings. Cranly 
turned, and Dixon, who had whistled, called out: 

--Where are you fellows off to? What about that game, Cranly? 

They parleyed in shouts across the still air about a game of billiards to be 
played in the Adelphi hotel. But was your father what is called well-to-do? I 
mean, when you were growing up? 

--Yes, Stephen said. He wondered whether the scullion's apron was damp too or 
whether all white things were cold and damp. He would know obscure things, 
hidden from others, from those who were conceived and born children of wrath. 

--Of whom are you speaking? Stephen asked at length. 

--Static therefore, said Stephen. Stephen, seeing and hearing the hotel keeper 
through his father's face and voice, laughed. 

--You are an artist, are you not, Mr Dedalus? said the dean, glancing up and 
blinking his pale eyes. Leave dreams to the dreamers That will not after, That 
song and laughter 

Do nothing move. ” 

The boy went out and Mr Henchy began to rub his hands cheerfully, saying: 

“Ah, well, he’s not so bad after all. 

“He is dead,” she said at length. Do you know that about the Forsters? 

He paused for an answer. 

--Neither my arse nor my elbow! Temple cried out scornfully. His father, who 
had begun life as an advanced Nationalist, had modified his views early. Some 
new pieces of music encumbered the music-stand in the lower room and on his 
shelves stood two volumes by Nietzsche: _Thus Spake Zarathustra_ and _The Gay 
Science_. But granted even that, it is, to my mind, a princely failing, and one 
that I trust will long be cultivated among us. It was not like the smell of the 
old peasants who knelt at the back of the chapel at Sunday mass. . ?” 

“I’m awfully sorry, old man. 

Gabriel coloured and was about to knit his brows, as if he did not understand, 
when she said bluntly: 

“O, innocent Amy! I have found out that you write for _The Daily Express_. 
” 

“I have been at him all the evening,” said Miss O’Callaghan, “and Mrs 
Conroy too and he told us he had a dreadful cold and couldn’t sing. 

“No,” continued Aunt Kate, “she wouldn’t be said or led by anyone, 
slaving there in that choir night and day, night and day. 

Mr Dedalus gave a snort of contempt. He felt with a smart of dejection that the 
man to whom he was speaking was a countryman of Ben Jonson. His mother said: 

--O, Stephen will apologize. 

--CORPUS DOMINI NOSTRI. After a pause Stephen began: 

--Aristotle has not defined pity and terror. Our Uncrowned King is dead. We 
have all of us living duties and living affections which claim, and rightly 
claim, our strenuous endeavours. Ha! Ha! Ha! 

Mr Dedalus turned to his wife and interjected in his natural voice: 

--Shows you the spirit in which they take the boys there. He watched the 
visitors come down the steps from the house and pass into the theatre. In 
Westmoreland Street the footpaths were crowded with young men and women 
returning from business and ragged urchins ran here and there yelling out the 
names of the evening editions. In a waking dream he went through the quiet 
morning towards the college. For some time he had felt the slight change in his 
house; and those changes in what he had deemed unchangeable were so many slight 
shocks to his boyish conception of the world. 

A few moments after he found himself on the stage amid the garish gas and the 
dim scenery, acting before the innumerable faces of the void. As soon as he was 
on the landing the man pulled a shepherd’s plaid cap out of his pocket, put 
it on his head and ran quickly down the rickety stairs. ” 

A hearty murmur of assent ran round the table. 

“He is dead,” she said at length. The torment of fire is the greatest 
torment to which the tyrant has ever subjected his fellow creatures. These 
barmbracks seemed uncut; but if you went closer you would see that they had 
been cut into long thick even slices and were ready to be handed round at tea. 
When the gymnasium had been opened he had heard another voice urging him to be 
strong and manly and healthy and when the movement towards national revival had 
begun to be felt in the college yet another voice had bidden him be true to his 
country and help to raise up her language and tradition. And now she had nobody 
to protect her. 



Perhaps that was why they were there because it was a place where some fellows 
wrote things for cod. 

--They are the Lord's anointed, Dante said. Her head was leaned against the 
window curtains and in her nostrils was the odour of dusty cretonne. She held 
an open book on her knees and was pointing out something in it to Constantine 
who, dressed in a man-o’-war suit, lay at her feet. She has no priest to 
flirt with, he thought with conscious bitterness, remembering how he had seen 
her last. Pray to Our Blessed Lady when that sin comes into your mind. She will 
help you, my child. 

As Mr Holohan was a novice in such delicate matters as the wording of bills and 
the disposing of items for a programme, Mrs Kearney helped him. 

Donovan again laid his hand on his chest and said: 

--Our end is the acquisition of knowledge. He was unheeded, happy and near to 
the wild heart of life. ” 

“And what about Dowling?” asked Mr M’Coy. 

“We both believe in----” 

He hesitated for a moment. 

--Hell, Temple said. 

--You, John? 

--I'm all right. 

--You are quite welcome, sir. Stephen, scarlet with shame, opened a book 
quickly with one weak hand and bent down upon it, his face close to the page. 

It was unfair and cruel because the doctor had told him not to read without 
glasses and he had written home to his father that morning to send him a new 
pair. It is like looking down from the cliffs of Moher into the depths. And 
this terrible fire will not afflict the bodies of the damned only from without, 
but each lost soul will be a hell unto itself, the boundless fire raging in its 
very vitals. TOWER OF IVORY, they used to say, HOUSE OF GOLD! How could a woman 
be a tower of ivory or a house of gold? Who was right then? And he remembered 
the evening in the infirmary in Clongowes, the dark waters, the light at the 
pierhead and the moan of sorrow from the people when they had heard. HOUSE OF 
GOLD. By thinking of things you could understand them. 

But why in the square? You went there when you wanted to do something. I supple 
and suave. But the grey face still followed me. 

Father Arnall came in and the Latin lesson began and he remained still, leaning 
on the desk with his arms folded. No king or emperor on this earth has the 
power of the priest of God. Let no worldly shame hold you back. God is still 
the merciful Lord who wishes not the eternal death of the sinner but rather 
that he be converted and live. Yes? What? Yes? His flesh shrank together as it 
felt the approach of the ravenous tongues of flames, dried up as it felt about 
it the swirl of stifling air. He had died. He halted under a tree and allowed 
the rhythm to die away. He couldn’t do anything. He said that if ever he 
found a boy talking to girls or having a girl for a sweetheart he would whip 
him and whip him; and that would teach him not to be talking to girls. 

“Good-evening, Freddy,” said Aunt Julia. In the little room downstairs we 
found Eliza seated in his arm-chair in state. Amen. So be it. ” 

Mr Kernan’s expression changed. ” 

Gabriel coloured as if he felt he had made a mistake and, without looking at 
her, kicked off his goloshes and flicked actively with his muffler at his 
patent-leather shoes. 

When the Irish Revival began to be appreciable Mrs Kearney determined to take 
advantage of her daughter’s name and brought an Irish teacher to the house. 
And when he had escaped from them they broke away in all directions, flinging 
their caps again into the air and whistling as they went spinning up and 
crying: 

--Hurroo! 

And they gave three groans for Baldyhead Dolan and three cheers for Conmee and 
they said he was the decentest rector that was ever in Clongowes. 



* * * * * 



He could wait no longer. 

“That so, John?” 

“Yes. Saint Thomas, the greatest doctor of the church, the angelic doctor, as 
he is called, says that the worst damnation consists in this, that the 
understanding of man is totally deprived of divine light and his affection 
obstinately turned away from the goodness of God. These devils, who were once 
beautiful angels, have become as hideous and ugly as they once were beautiful. 
Maria had cut them herself. ” 

But Maria said she had brought something special for papa and mamma, something 
they would be sure to like, and she began to look for her plumcake. “There 
used always to be crowds of Protestants in the chapel where Father Tom was 
preaching. ” 

The room was silent again. 

“No,” continued Aunt Kate, “she wouldn’t be said or led by anyone, 
slaving there in that choir night and day, night and day. Church Street chapel. 

--Church? 

She shifted the can to her other hand and directed him; and, as she held out 
her reeking withered right hand under its fringe of shawl, he bent lower 
towards her, saddened and soothed by her voice. Mr Browne still seemed not to 
understand. He spoke volubly, but Mrs Kearney said curtly at intervals: 

“She won’t go on. 

“Good-evening, Freddy,” said Aunt Julia. 

--You'd think butter wouldn't melt in your mouth said Heron. 

Father Dolan and I, when I told them all at dinner about it, Father Dolan and I 
had a great laugh over it. Then he said: 

--Well now, the day kept up fine after all. There must be some left. He bowed 
his head, overcome. But to drink the altar wine out of the press and be found 
out by the smell was a sin too: but it was not terrible and strange. They 
wouldn’t have dared to have treated her like that if she had been a man. The 
ticket-collector saluted Jimmy; he was an old man: 

“Fine night, sir!” 

It was a serene summer night; the harbour lay like a darkened mirror at their 
feet. From the evil seed of lust all other deadly sins had sprung forth: pride 
in himself and contempt of others, covetousness in using money for the purchase 
of unlawful pleasures, envy of those whose vices he could not reach to and 
calumnious murmuring against the pious, gluttonous enjoyment of food, the dull 
glowering anger amid which he brooded upon his longing, the swamp of spiritual 
and bodily sloth in which his whole being had sunk. 

As he sat in his bench gazing calmly at the rector's shrewd harsh face, his 
mind wound itself in and out of the curious questions proposed to it. 

“Bring me a plate of peas,” he said, “and a bottle of ginger beer. He 
turned into the pillared hall, now calmly lit, went up the staircase and passed 
in through the clicking turnstile. It was no use making him take the pledge: he 
was sure to break out again a few days after. ” 

“O yes,” said Mr M’Coy, “_Tenebrae_. “He was no great trouble to us. 
Isn’t it a terrible thing to die so young as that?” 

“What was he?” asked Gabriel, still ironically. 

“He was in the gasworks,” she said. Every morning he came in from 
Chapelizod by tram. Write away. You, boy, who are you? 

Stephen's heart jumped suddenly. Nobody knew. He put it on his own plate, 
saying: 

--Well, you can't say but you were asked. ” 

All his long years of service gone for nothing! All his industry and diligence 
thrown away! As a young man he had sown his wild oats, of course; he had 
boasted of his free-thinking and denied the existence of God to his companions 
in public-houses. Religion for her was a habit and she suspected that a man of 
her husband’s age would not change greatly before death. She was tempted to 
see a curious appropriateness in his accident and, but that she did not wish to 
seem bloody-minded, she would have told the gentlemen that Mr Kernan’s tongue 
would not suffer by being shortened. The poison tongue of Satan had done its 
work. It was a grave and ordered and passionless life that awaited him, a life 
without material cares. Farley clapped him on the back and laughed loudly. No 
one knew very well what the talk was about. He had known neither the pleasure 
of companionship with others nor the vigour of rude male health nor filial 
piety. The corridor was dark and silent but not unwatchful. Kathleen played a 
selection of Irish airs which was generously applauded. The first part closed 
with a stirring patriotic recitation delivered by a young lady who arranged 
amateur theatricals. ” 

“And did you not tell him to go back?” asked Gabriel. 

She leaned for a moment on his arm in getting out of the cab and while standing 
at the curbstone, bidding the others good-night. They went on together, Cranly 
repeating in strongly stressed rhythm the end of the refrain: 

And when we are married, O, how happy we'll be For I love sweet Rosie O'Grady 
And Rosie O'Grady loves me. Their fathers were magistrates, the fellows said. 
Could she still draw back after all he had done for her? Her distress awoke a 
nausea in her body and she kept moving her lips in silent fervent prayer. 

It was not thought nor vision though he knew vaguely that her figure was 
passing homeward through the city. I fear more than that the chemical action 
which would be set up in my soul by a false homage to a symbol behind which are 
massed twenty centuries of authority and veneration. Damn you and damn 
everything. Damn him one way or the other! 

APRIL 14. I want a job of five hundred a year. 

--Of course he will, said Mr Dedalus. They used to kiss. 

She got out of her tram at the Pillar and ferreted her way quickly among the 
crowds. “My daughter has her contract. She will get four pounds eight into 
her hand or a foot she won’t put on that platform. Father Arnall knew more 
than Dante because he was a priest but both his father and uncle Charles said 
that Dante was a clever woman and a well-read woman. But his face was 
black-looking and his eyes were staring though his voice was so quiet. 

--It might clear up, sir. Go home, blast you, for you're a hopeless bloody man. 
” 

The man walked heavily towards the door and, as he went out of the room, he 
heard Mr Alleyne cry after him that if the contract was not copied by evening 
Mr Crosbie would hear of the matter. He ordered the same again. His arms are 
open to receive you even though you have sinned against Him. 

A tall figure came down the aisle and the penitents stirred; and at the last 
moment, glancing up swiftly, he saw a long grey beard and the brown habit of a 
capuchin. 

“On that fire! You let the fire out! By God, I’ll teach you to do that 
again!” 

He took a step to the door and seized the walking-stick which was standing 
behind it. Didn't I give him that name? 

--You did. We're not deaf, said the tall consumptive. No, by the Lord Jesus 
(God forgive me) not half dead. He longed to be master of her strange mood. He 
seemed to bear disappointments lightly. He lifted up the counter and, passing 
by the clients, went out of the office with a heavy step. 





COUNTERPARTS 

THE bell rang furiously and, when Miss Parker went to the tube, a furious voice 
called out in a piercing North of Ireland accent: 

“Send Farrington here!” 

Miss Parker returned to her machine, saying to a man who was writing at a desk: 

“Mr Alleyne wants you upstairs. Very jolly it was. 

Every morning, therefore, uncle Charles repaired to his outhouse but not before 
he had greased and brushed scrupulously his back hair and brushed and put on 
his tall hat. Long talk with Cranly on the subject of my revolt. 

He had his grand manner on. Evening had fallen. Where? 

He looked northward towards Howth. Well, I suppose we had better, what? 

--Some place that's not too dear, said Mrs Dedalus. 

--And was he annoyed, Simon? 

--Annoyed? Not he! MANLY LITTLE CHAP! he said. Dead, sir. 

During these halts Stephen stood awkwardly behind the two men, weary of the 
subject and waiting restlessly for the slow march to begin again. He rolled its 
body, tender yet brittle as a grain of rice, between thumb and finger for an 
instant before he let it fall from him and wondered would it live or die. Four 
young men, who had come from the refreshment-room to stand in the doorway at 
the sound of the piano, had gone away quietly in couples after a few minutes. 
The only persons who seemed to follow the music were Mary Jane herself, her 
hands racing along the key-board or lifted from it at the pauses like those of 
a priestess in momentary imprecation, and Aunt Kate standing at her elbow to 
turn the page. Everyone tried to quiet him. Mr Alleyne flushed to the hue of a 
wild rose and his mouth twitched with a dwarf’s passion. A man of seventy had 
bitten off a piece of his tongue during an epileptic fit and the tongue had 
filled in again so that no one could see a trace of the bite. 











He drained his third cup of watery tea to the dregs and set to chewing the 
crusts of fried bread that were scattered near him, staring into the dark pool 
of the jar. Where? 

--Dinner? said Mr Dedalus. The sea had fallen below the line of seawrack on the 
shallow side of the breakwater and already the tide was running out fast along 
the foreshore. Then he said: 





_“For the children of this world are wiser in their generation than the 
children of light. He thought his face must be white because it felt so cool. 
The porter halted on the stairs to settle his guttering candle. When all had 
been safely stowed the vans had set off noisily down the avenue: and from the 
window of the railway carriage, in which he had sat with his red-eyed mother, 
Stephen had seen them lumbering along the Merrion Road. He bestowed them in his 
pockets with feigned composure and suffered the friendly teller, to whom his 
father chatted, to take his hand across the broad counter and wish him a 
brilliant career in after life. Mr Holohan came into the dressing-room every 
few minutes with reports from the box-office. He had tried to spell out the 
headline for himself though he knew already what it was for it was the last of 
the book. It had cast a gloom over him which he tried to dispel by arranging 
his cuffs and the bows of his tie. God was almighty. ” 

“Is there any chance of a drink itself?” asked Mr O’Connor. “And I’m 
sure now that he’s gone to his eternal reward he won’t forget you and all 
your kindness to him. ” 

“Ah, poor James!” said Eliza. A friend of hers had shown her his review of 
Browning’s poems. The priests were always the true friends of Ireland. 

“_You--know--nothing_. He doesn't smoke and he doesn't go to bazaars and he 
doesn't flirt and he doesn't damn anything or damn all. What’s the world 
coming to when sons speaks that way to their father?” 

“What age is he?” said Mr O’Connor. 

“Nineteen,” said the old man. “I hope to God he’ll not leave us in the 
lurch tonight. He’s a clever chap, too, with the pen. He’s fond of his 
glass of grog and he’s a bit of a rake, perhaps, and he’s a good sportsman. 
He’s a jolly fine decent fellow, if you ask me, and no damn nonsense about 
him. We’ll come here one of these nights and talk it over. ” 

“Work it all right now,” said Lenehan in farewell. ” 

“Good-night, Gabriel. 

“He told me: ‘What do you think of a Lord Mayor of Dublin sending out for a 
pound of chops for his dinner? How’s that for high living?’ says he. She 
smiled and shook his hand. The light from the lamp opposite our door caught the 
white curve of her neck, lit up her hair that rested there and, falling, lit up 
the hand upon the railing. When all had been safely stowed the vans had set off 
noisily down the avenue: and from the window of the railway carriage, in which 
he had sat with his red-eyed mother, Stephen had seen them lumbering along the 
Merrion Road. A small ring of wonderstruck children and nursemaids would gather 
to watch him and linger even when he and uncle Charles had sat down again and 
were talking athletics and politics. Could he not escape from his little house? 
Was it too late for him to try to live bravely like Gallaher? Could he go to 
London? There was the furniture still to be paid for. . . funnel. 

--Is that called a tundish in Ireland? asked the dean. He was sick then. The 
barometer of his emotional nature was set for a spell of riot. He took no part 
in the conversation for a long while but listened, with an air of calm enmity, 
while his friends discussed the Jesuits. 

“I’ll get you a match,” said the old man. Confess! Confess! It was not 
enough to lull the conscience with a tear and a prayer. He had to kneel before 
the minister of the Holy Ghost and tell over his hidden sins truly and 
repentantly. He tried to weigh his soul to see if it was a poet’s soul. So he 
had sunk to the state of a beast that licks his chaps after meat. Apply to the 
jesuit theologian, Juan Mariana de Talavera, who will also explain to you in 
what circumstances you may lawfully kill your king and whether you had better 
hand him his poison in a goblet or smear it for him upon his robe or his 
saddlebow. Ask me rather would I suffer others to rob me, or if they did, would 
I call down upon them what I believe is called the chastisement of the secular 
arm? 

--And would you? 

--I think, Stephen said, it would pain me as much to do so as to be robbed. Who 
is the greatest writer, Dedalus? 

Stephen noted the mockery in the question and said: 

--Of prose do you mean? 

--Yes. 

--Hoho, Fleming! An idler of course. To please me, I mean. 

The slide was shot back. 

While she spoke she turned a silver bracelet round and round her wrist. The 
strife of their minds was quelled. An esthetic image is presented to us either 
in space or in time. His mind seemed older than theirs: it shone coldly on 
their strifes and happiness and regrets like a moon upon a younger earth. The 
wisdom of the priest's appeal did not touch him to the quick. At the end of the 
walk he halted before turning and raised his eyes. 

But Joe said it didn’t matter and made her sit down by the fire. 

Mr Dedalus threw his knife and fork noisily on his plate. 

He turned away from her suddenly and set off across the strand. All the windows 
of the boarding house were open and the lace curtains ballooned gently towards 
the street beneath the raised sashes. Wells too would be there but no fellow 
would look at him. So down with your breeches And out with your bum. When we 
come to the phenomena of artistic conception, artistic gestation, and artistic 
reproduction I require a new terminology and a new personal experience. . The 
sailors’ eyes were blue and grey and even black. But his head was not clear 
and his mind wandered away to the glare and rattle of the public-house. Then he 
asked Fleming and Fleming said that the word had no plural. The past is 
consumed in the present and the present is living only because it brings forth 
the future. The deceased had been in the habit of crossing the lines late at 
night from platform to platform and, in view of certain other circumstances of 
the case, he did not think the railway officials were to blame. 

He could still hear his father's voice-- 

--When you kick out for yourself, Stephen--as I daresay you will one of these 
days--remember, whatever you do, to mix with gentlemen. 

Mr Dedalus went to the end of the table and said: 

--Now, Mrs Riordan, sit over. A brief anger had often invested him but he had 
never been able to make it an abiding passion and had always felt himself 
passing out of it as if his very body were being divested with ease of some 
outer skin or peel. She passed by with her daughter and a quick glance through 
the open door of the hall showed her the cause of the stewards’ idleness. She 
took out her purse with the silver clasps and read again the words _A Present 
from Belfast_. She stood on the curbstone, swinging a sunshade in one hand. Her 
husband called out to her: 

“And have you nothing for me, duckie?” 

“O, you! The back of my hand to you!” said Mrs Kernan tartly. He did not 
visit her for a week, then he wrote to her asking her to meet him. 

He was sitting on the backless chair in his aunt's kitchen. Make up your minds 
for that. Every day Father Dolan. It never fell away. 

--What is that exactly? asked Lynch. 

The soft beauty of the Latin word touched with an enchanting touch the dark of 
the evening, with a touch fainter and more persuading than the touch of music 
or of a woman's hand. Did you ever see such a go-by-the-wall? 

His phrase was greeted by a strange laugh from a student who lounged against 
the wall, his peaked cap down on his eyes. 

He was watching Cranly's firm-featured suffering face, lit up now by a smile of 
false patience. And while he was dressing himself as quickly as he could the 
prefect said: 

--We must pack off to Brother Michael because we have the collywobbles! 

He was very decent to say that. 

Goggins skipped down on to the gravel and at once returned to his place with 
good humour. It was known that the speaker had secret sources of information. 
But we are living in a sceptical and, if I may use the phrase, a 
thought-tormented age: and sometimes I fear that this new generation, educated 
or hypereducated as it is, will lack those qualities of humanity, of 
hospitality, of kindly humour which belonged to an older day. It was that 
windless hour of dawn when madness wakes and strange plants open to the light 
and the moth flies forth silently. At Westland Row Station a crowd of people 
pressed to the carriage doors; but the porters moved them back, saying that it 
was a special train for the bazaar. 

“I was just telling my mother,” he said, “I never heard you sing so well, 
never. 

Lynch smote himself sonorously on the chest and said: 

--Who has anything to say about my girth? 

Cranly took him at the word and the two began to tussle. 

The scorn and anger in his voice brought Cranly's eyes back from a calm survey 
of the walls of the hall. 

--Damn your yellow insolence, answered Lynch. She felt him seize her hand: 

“Come!” 

All the seas of the world tumbled about her heart. 

Now I call that friendly, don't you? 

Yes, I liked her today. 

--Six months? 

--Eight months, father. Stephen mumbled his bread without answering his 
father's gaze. 

Wells said: 

--O, I say, here's a fellow says he doesn't kiss his mother before he goes to 
bed. 

Cranly smiled and said kindly: 

--The captain has only one love: sir Walter Scott. His body ached to do 
something, to rush out and revel in violence. 

--We are assembled here today, my dear little brothers in Christ, for one brief 
moment far away from the busy bustle of the outer world to celebrate and to 
honour one of the greatest of saints, the apostle of the Indies, the patron 
saint also of your college, saint Francis Xavier. 

--Yes, father? 

--Is your lazy bitch of a brother gone out yet? 

--Yes, father. They cry unto the night their battle-name: I moan in sleep when 
I hear afar their whirling laughter. 

The prefect was there again and it was his voice that was saying that he was to 
get up, that Father Minister had said he was to get up and dress and go to the 
infirmary. . . 

He held a piece of fowl up on the prong of the carving fork. Then he said: 

--Poor old Christy, he's nearly lopsided now with roguery. 

“He was too scrupulous always,” she said. Very jolly it was. 

Every morning, therefore, uncle Charles repaired to his outhouse but not before 
he had greased and brushed scrupulously his back hair and brushed and put on 
his tall hat. We endeavoured, that is, to imagine with the senses of the mind, 
in our imagination, the material character of that awful place and of the 
physical torments which all who are in hell endure. 

It was too late and we were too tired to carry out our project of visiting the 
Pigeon House. Then would begin Stephen's run round the park. ” 

She broke loose from him and ran to the bed and, throwing her arms across the 
bed-rail, hid her face. Hardly had she brought one gentleman into the little 
pantry behind the office on the ground floor and helped him off with his 
overcoat than the wheezy hall-door bell clanged again and she had to scamper 
along the bare hallway to let in another guest. The man and I watched the 
chase. He was the son of a hall porter in an office in the city and, as a boy, 
he had sung prolonged bass notes in the resounding hall. He would be thirty-one 
in November. 

Wells said: 

--I didn't mean to, honour bright. A crude grey light, mirrored in the sluggish 
water and a smell of wet branches over their heads seemed to war against the 
course of Stephen's thought. 

“Why, Gretta?” he asked. 

“Me, pa. 

Could it be? He knelt there sinless and timid; and he would hold upon his 
tongue the host and God would enter his purified body. 

He began to speak in a quiet tone. And when I was only a week in the convent he 
died and he was buried in Oughterard where his people came from. Besides they 
were dreadfully afraid that Freddy Malins might turn up screwed. 

Rapid motion through space elates one; so does notoriety; so does the 
possession of money. 

On a certain Tuesday the course of his triumphs was rudely broken. ” 

Their neighbours had turned to listen to the cross-examination. And the 
children, Gretta, you’re not anxious about them?” 

“O, for one night,” said Mrs Conroy. 

The images he had summoned gave him no pleasure. “Isn’t that fine? What?” 

Mr Crofton said that it was a very fine piece of writing. 





A MOTHER 

MR HOLOHAN, assistant secretary of the _Eire Abu_ Society, had been walking up 
and down Dublin for nearly a month, with his hands and pockets full of dirty 
pieces of paper, arranging about the series of concerts. “Didn’t she tell 
me herself?” 

Lenehan made a tragic gesture. ” 

“You’d better speak to Mr Fitzpatrick,” said Mr Holohan distantly. The 
room was lively. On Friday confession will be heard all the afternoon after 
beads. He crammed his cap back again into his pocket and re-entered the office, 
assuming an air of absent-mindedness. The constable knelt down also to help. 
The student's body shook all over and, to ease his mirth, he rubbed both his 
hands delightedly over his groins. The glories of Mary held his soul captive: 
spikenard and myrrh and frankincense, symbolizing her royal lineage, her 
emblems, the late-flowering plant and late-blossoming tree, symbolizing the 
age-long gradual growth of her cultus among men. The vast cycle of starry life 
bore his weary mind outward to its verge and inward to its centre, a distant 
music accompanying him outward and inward. Death, in his opinion, had been 
probably due to shock and sudden failure of the heart’s action. 

Mr H. 

He came level with his friend and looked keenly in his face. 

“O, what a pity!” she cried. Are you not weary of ardent ways? 

While sacrificing hands upraise The chalice flowing to the brim. 

Cranly, embarrassed for a moment, took another fig from his pocket and was 
about to eat it when Stephen said: 

--Don't, please. These devils will afflict the damned in two ways, by their 
presence and by their reproaches. Maria had cut them herself. The next-door 
girls put some saucers on the table and then led the children up to the table, 
blindfold. 

He could still leave the chapel. He felt with a smart of dejection that the man 
to whom he was speaking was a countryman of Ben Jonson. The warmth, fragrance 
and colour of her body appealed to his senses. He was surprised at their 
manners and at their accents, and his brow grew thoughtful. 

In a few minutes an apologetic “Pok!” was heard as the cork flew out of Mr 
Lyons’ bottle. We have all his poetry at home in a book. And I say,” he 
added, pointing to the candle, “you might remove that handsome article, like 
a good man. We’ll have a family party. ” 

“Faith, Mr Henchy,” said the old man, “you’d keep up better style than 
some of them. “Wait till you see whether he will or not. I know him. But my 
body was like a harp and her words and gestures were like fingers running upon 
the wires. 

--It might clear up, sir. 

Cranly laughed, tightening his grip on Stephen's arm, and said: 

--The distillery is damn good. Tried to read three reviews. Told me once, in a 
moment of thoughtlessness, his father was sixty-one when he was born. Got 
threepence. 

Then went to college. 

--Because there is a thigh in it, he said. Leave dreams to the dreamers That 
will not after, That song and laughter 

Do nothing move. 

--Dedalus, said MacCann crisply, I believe you're a good fellow but you have 
yet to learn the dignity of altruism and the responsibility of the human 
individual. She started to her feet and ran to the banisters. The others spoke 
only a few words, pointing out some building or street. He felt that they were 
hard-featured realists and that they resented an exactitude which was the 
produce of a leisure not within their reach. 

--Of whom are you speaking? Stephen asked at length. The injured man said again 
as well as he could: 

“I’ ‘ery ‘uch o’liged to you, sir. The first tenor bent his head and 
began to count the links of the gold chain which was extended across his waist, 
smiling and humming random notes to observe the effect on the frontal sinus. 





Polly sat for a little time on the side of the bed, crying. In heart you are an 
Irish man but your pride is too powerful. 











Uncle Charles smoked such black twist that at last his nephew suggested to him 
to enjoy his morning smoke in a little outhouse at the end of the garden. 

--Goodbye, Stephen said in his wake. They are not as tall as men. 

Mrs Kearney brought her daughter over to them, and talked to them amiably. 

--Your father, said the little old man to Stephen, was the boldest flirt in the 
City of Cork in his day. He's the only man I see in this institution that has 
an individual mind. 

--Institution! Individual! cried Cranly. 

This time Lenehan was inclined to disbelieve. Year after year, for much longer 
than any of you, my dear little boys, can remember or than I can remember, the 
boys of this college have met in this very chapel to make their annual retreat 
before the feast day of their patron saint. Time has gone on and brought with 
it its changes. Even in the last few years what changes can most of you not 
remember? Many of the boys who sat in those front benches a few years ago are 
perhaps now in distant lands, in the burning tropics, or immersed in 
professional duties or in seminaries, or voyaging over the vast expanse of the 
deep or, it may be, already called by the great God to another life and to the 
rendering up of their stewardship. It may have been these constant showers of 
snuff which gave his ancient priestly garments their green faded look for the 
red handkerchief, blackened, as it always was, with the snuff-stains of a week, 
with which he tried to brush away the fallen grains, was quite inefficacious. 
Her voice, strong and clear in tone, attacked with great spirit the runs which 
embellish the air and though she sang very rapidly she did not miss even the 
smallest of the grace notes. 

Her husband called after her: 

“Nothing for poor little hubby!” 

He assumed such a comical face and voice that the distribution of the bottles 
of stout took place amid general merriment. Go on. 

--I'm an emotional man, said Temple. You are right to go your way. ” 

He tossed his glass to his mouth, finished his drink and laughed loudly. Hardly 
had she brought one gentleman into the little pantry behind the office on the 
ground floor and helped him off with his overcoat than the wheezy hall-door 
bell clanged again and she had to scamper along the bare hallway to let in 
another guest. It was well for her she had not to attend to the ladies also. 
The water would rise inch by inch, covering the grass and shrubs, covering the 
trees and houses, covering the monuments and the mountain tops. Yes, and it was 
not darkness that fell from the air. 

The air of the room chilled his shoulders. 

All the fellows were silent: and Athy said: 

--And that's why. Find these and you find the qualities of universal beauty. 
Aquinas says: AD PULCRITUDINEM TRIA REQUIRUNTUR INTEGRITAS, CONSONANTIA, 
CLARITAS. It baffled me for a long time. A dull resentment against his life 
awoke within him. The bell and the bird ceased; and the dull white light spread 
itself east and west, covering the world, covering the roselight in his heart. 
He made the sign of the cross and prayed of the priest to bless him for he had 
sinned. 

They turned down Baggot Street and he followed them at once, taking the other 
footpath. With Leo Dillon and a boy named Mahony I planned a day’s miching. 

--With women, my child? 

--Yes, father. Gabriel leaned his ten trembling fingers on the tablecloth and 
smiled nervously at the company. It is a tradition that is unique as far as my 
experience goes (and I have visited not a few places abroad) among the modern 
nations. He remembered the summer evening he had been there to be dressed as 
boatbearer, the evening of the Procession to the little altar in the wood. Mrs 
Dedalus rose quickly and followed her towards the door. At the door Dante 
turned round violently and shouted down the room, her cheeks flushed and 
quivering with rage: 

--Devil out of hell! We won! We crushed him to death! Fiend! 

The door slammed behind her. The young man who had seen Mac in Westmoreland 
Street asked was it true that Mac had won a bit over a billiard match. Cranly 
turned, and Dixon, who had whistled, called out: 

--Where are you fellows off to? What about that game, Cranly? 

They parleyed in shouts across the still air about a game of billiards to be 
played in the Adelphi hotel. 

--Look at him! he said. Ségouin, Jimmy decided, had a very refined taste. The 
party was increased by a young Englishman named Routh whom Jimmy had seen with 
Ségouin at Cambridge. The citizens of Dublin will benefit by it. This union 
exalted him, wore away the rough edges of his character, emotionalised his 
mental life. 

--I will try to learn it, said Stephen. Now, Simon, that's quite enough now. So 
timeless seemed the grey warm air, so fluid and impersonal his own mood, that 
all ages were as one to him. Well, I started to walk and on I went and it was 
coming on night when I got into the Ballyhoura hills, that's better than ten 
miles from Kilmallock and there's a long lonely road after that. 

--Underdone's? 

--Yes. 

--I bow to you, Dixon said, but I had the impression that limbo existed for 
such cases. “And so much the better for us--a bob and a tanner instead of a 
bob. But come on, Gabriel, into the drawing-room. Only at times, in the pauses 
of his desire, when the luxury that was wasting him gave room to a softer 
languor, the image of Mercedes traversed the background of his memory. He 
shivered and yawned. When the party had divided into three sections, each under 
its own leader and in its own garret, he had discontinued his attendances. 
Cranly, leaning against a pillar, was picking his teeth with a sharpened match, 
listening to some companions. 

--He was like you, I fancy, said Stephen, an emotional man. He named it with 
humility and shame and repented of it once more. Then he drank a glass of 
water, pushed his plate to one side, doubled the paper down before him between 
his elbows and read the paragraph over and over again. They can wait. They took 
the train at Westland Row and in a few seconds, as it seemed to Jimmy, they 
were walking out of Kingstown Station. They come shaking in triumph their long, 
green hair: They come out of the sea and run shouting by the shore. It would be 
lovely to sleep for one night in that cottage before the fire of smoking turf, 
in the dark lit by the fire, in the warm dark, breathing the smell of the 
peasants, air and rain and turf and corduroy. 

Stephen looked with affection at Mr Casey's face which stared across the table 
over his joined hands. Then he said: 

“Well!. He ran after them a little way and then stopped. Melancholy was the 
dominant note of his temperament, he thought, but it was a melancholy tempered 
by recurrences of faith and resignation and simple joy. If he could give 
expression to it in a book of poems perhaps men would listen. 

--By hell, that's a good one! said the gipsy student to those about him, that's 
a fine expression. 

“What age are you?” he asked. Only sometimes, they say, he didn’t preach 
what was quite orthodox. He shivered and yawned. Then replacing the jar in the 
locker he poured a little of the whisky into two glasses, added a little water 
and came back with them to the fireplace. Everybody had a solution for the 
mystery and Mrs Donnelly said it was plain that Maria had left it behind her in 
the tram. Never once had it fallen flat. 

“I hope he’ll look smart about it if he means business,” said Mr 
O’Connor. He knew that his father had paid a guinea for it in Dunn's of 
D'Olier Street and that the man had prodded it often at the breastbone to show 
how good it was: and he remembered the man's voice when he had said: 

--Take that one, sir. He is said to have baptized as many as ten thousand 
idolaters in one month. The corridor was dark and silent but not unwatchful. He 
heard a confused music within him as of memories and names which he was almost 
conscious of but could not capture even for an instant; then the music seemed 
to recede, to recede, to recede, and from each receding trail of nebulous music 
there fell always one longdrawn calling note, piercing like a star the dusk of 
silence. He stood up in terror and walked blindly into the box. Nannie gave the 
lead and we three knelt down at the foot of the bed. The old woman pointed 
upwards interrogatively and, on my aunt’s nodding, proceeded to toil up the 
narrow staircase before us, her bowed head being scarcely above the level of 
the banister-rail. 

His evenings were his own; and he pored over a ragged translation of THE COUNT 
OF MONTE CRISTO. After an interval, he uncovered his face and rose. She was 
half undressed as if she was going to bed when I knocked and she had her hair 
hanging and I thought by her figure and by something in the look of her eyes 
that she must be carrying a child. It was she who had chosen the name of her 
sons for she was very sensible of the dignity of family life. He was standing 
at the gate, his peaked cap pushed back on his head and his hair tumbled 
forward over a face of bronze. What was it that stood in his way? His 
unfortunate timidity! He wished to vindicate himself in some way, to assert his 
manhood. 

--I will ask you, therefore, my dear boys, to put away from your minds during 
these few days all worldly thoughts, whether of study or pleasure or ambition, 
and to give all your attention to the state of your souls. The telegraph poles 
were passing, passing. 

--Pothead! Cranly said with calm contempt. As the two young men walked on 
through the crowd Corley occasionally turned to smile at some of the passing 
girls but Lenehan’s gaze was fixed on the large faint moon circled with a 
double halo. 

“It’s all right, Mr Shelley,” said the man, pointing with his finger to 
indicate the objective of his journey. And therefore the air was silent save 
for one soft hiss that fell. Everyone was so fond of Maria. Gabriel watched his 
wife, who did not join in the conversation. It sounded so genuine that a little 
colour struggled into Aunt Julia’s face as she bent to replace in the 
music-stand the old leather-bound songbook that had her initials on the cover. 
And how cold and slimy the water had been! And a fellow had once seen a big rat 
jump plop into the scum. Suddenly, as he was fingering his watch-chain, he 
thought of Terry Kelly’s pawn-office in Fleet Street. That was the dart! Why 
didn’t he think of it sooner? 

He went through the narrow alley of Temple Bar quickly, muttering to himself 
that they could all go to hell because he was going to have a good night of it. 
I looked it up and find it English and good old blunt English too. Then he 
asked us which of us had the most sweethearts. 

Bend down your faces, Oona and Aleel. He gazed calmly before him at the waning 
sky, glad of the cool of the evening and of the faint yellow glow which hid the 
tiny flame kindling upon his cheek. He had sent his son to England to be 
educated in a big Catholic college and had afterwards sent him to Dublin 
University to study law. 





A PAINFUL CASE 

MR JAMES DUFFY lived in Chapelizod because he wished to live as far as possible 
from the city of which he was a citizen and because he found all the other 
suburbs of Dublin mean, modern and pretentious. A troubled night of dreams. The 
faint murmur began again. In earthly prisons the poor captive has at least some 
liberty of movement, were it only within the four walls of his cell or in the 
gloomy yard of his prison. Amen. 



All blessed themselves and Mr Dedalus with a sigh of pleasure lifted from the 
dish the heavy cover pearled around the edge with glistening drops. Michael 
Robartes remembers forgotten beauty and, when his arms wrap her round, he 
presses in his arms the loveliness which has long faded from the world. Not 
this. I desire to press in my arms the loveliness which has not yet come into 
the world. As I did so I met the gaze of a pair of bottle-green eyes peering at 
me from under a twitching forehead. I turned my eyes away again. Upon my word 
it was magnificent, the style of the oratory. 

His courtesy of manner rang a little false and Stephen looked at the English 
convert with the same eyes as the elder brother in the parable may have turned 
on the prodigal. We endeavoured, that is, to imagine with the senses of the 
mind, in our imagination, the material character of that awful place and of the 
physical torments which all who are in hell endure. But we were all gentlemen, 
Stephen--at least I hope we were--and bloody good honest Irishmen too. It was 
lovely to be tired. 

--The tragic emotion, in fact, is a face looking two ways, towards terror and 
towards pity, both of which are phases of it. Buy that lovely bunch. Will you, 
gentleman? 

The blue flowers which she lifted towards him and her young blue eyes seemed to 
him at that instant images of guilelessness, and he halted till the image had 
vanished and he saw only her ragged dress and damp coarse hair and hoydenish 
face. The air was very silent and you could hear the cricket bats but more 
slowly than before: pick, pock. O! In the virgin womb of the imagination the 
word was made flesh. Gabriel the seraph had come to the virgin's chamber. She 
was a slim, growing girl, pale in complexion and with hay-coloured hair. She 
said she was all alone in the house and that her husband had gone that morning 
to Queenstown with his sister to see her off. 

“Miss Hill, don’t you see these ladies are waiting?” 

“Look lively, Miss Hill, please. 





EVELINE 

SHE sat at the window watching the evening invade the avenue. Amen. 

Stephen sat in the front bench of the chapel. Stephen stood among them, afraid 
to speak, listening. Cranly's speech, unlike that of Davin, had neither rare 
phrases of Elizabethan English nor quaintly turned versions of Irish idioms. 

His step was angry and with an angry abrupt gesture he thrust the stick back 
into Stephen's hand. 

--From me! said Stephen in astonishment. 

--But why are they sent to hell if Jesus said they were all to come? Temple 
said, his eyes searching Glynn's eyes. 

--What do you know about it? shouted Stephen. 

--Butter you up! said Brother Michael. 







XXVI 

Thou leanest to the shell of night, Dear lady, a divining ear. After about 
thirty seconds Weathers brought his opponent’s hand slowly down on to the 
table. 

“Won’t you let us drink them first?” said Mr Henchy. He was in a dark 
part of the hall gazing up the staircase. No memory of the past touched him, 
for his mind was full of a present joy. He had known neither the pleasure of 
companionship with others nor the vigour of rude male health nor filial piety. 
His friends talked very little. 

He walked listlessly round Stephen’s Green and then down Grafton Street. One 
humiliation had succeeded another--the false smiles of the market sellers, the 
curvetings and oglings of the barmaids with whom his father flirted, the 
compliments and encouraging words of his father's friends. The other, who 
walked on the verge of the path and was at times obliged to step on to the 
road, owing to his companion’s rudeness, wore an amused listening face. 

When I came home to dinner my uncle had not yet been home. 

“Every boy,” he said, “has a little sweetheart. 

--Because the church is cruel like all old sinners, Temple said. In two minutes 
he was surrounded by a ring of men. The man passed through the crowd, looking 
on the spectacle generally with proud satisfaction and staring masterfully at 
the office-girls. 

Suddenly he saw them coming towards him. 

--And he was another pig then, said Cranly. 

--Well, my little man, said the rector, what is it? 

Stephen swallowed down the thing in his throat and said: 

--I broke my glasses, sir. We saw him lying upon the catafalque. This evening 
we shall consider for a few moments the nature of the spiritual torments of 
hell. Besides Villona’s humming would confuse anybody; the noise of the car, 
too. 

--It's best of his play not to, Fleming said. 

Gabriel, trembling with delight at her sudden kiss and at the quaintness of her 
phrase, put his hands on her hair and began smoothing it back, scarcely 
touching it with his fingers. The fellow called Simon Moonan that name because 
Simon Moonan used to tie the prefect's false sleeves behind his back and the 
prefect used to let on to be angry. 

The train was full of fellows: a long long chocolate train with cream facings. 

--All are taking expulsion except Corrigan, Athy answered. All the windows of 
the boarding house were open and the lace curtains ballooned gently towards the 
street beneath the raised sashes. 

Boland, in fact, was said to have written on the slates in the yard a couplet 
about a classmate of his who often rode home from the college on a pony: 



As Tyson was riding into Jerusalem He fell and hurt his Alec Kafoozelum. The 
wind blew over him and passed on to the myriads and myriads of other souls on 
whom God's favour shone now more and now less, stars now brighter and now 
dimmer sustained and failing. He was pleasantly conscious that the bosom which 
he saw rise and fall slowly beneath him rose and fell at that moment for him, 
that the laughter and fragrance and wilful glances were his tribute. That was 
called politics. One fine day the old gentleman thought he’d like to drive 
out with the quality to a military review in the park. He was a suave, elderly 
man who balanced his imposing body, when at rest, upon a large silk umbrella. 
The heavy lumpish phrase sank slowly out of hearing like a stone through a 
quagmire. I HOPE I AM NOT DETAINING YOU. ” 

A look of perplexity appeared on Gabriel’s face. Freddy Malins’ left hand 
accepted the glass mechanically, his right hand being engaged in the mechanical 
readjustment of his dress. 

“I could only get one cab,” he said. 

--Admit. Mrs Dedalus was eating little and Dante sat with her hands in her lap. 
She made Mary collect the crusts and pieces of broken bread to help to make 
Tuesday’s bread-pudding. As she was naturally pale and unbending in manner 
she made few friends at school. From the street door he walked on furtively on 
the inner side of the path towards the corner and all at once dived into a 
doorway. 

The noise in the auditorium had risen to a clamour when Mr Fitzpatrick burst 
into the room, followed by Mr Holohan, who was panting. 

--Adam and Eve were then created by God and placed in Eden, in the plain of 
Damascus, that lovely garden resplendent with sunlight and colour, teeming with 
luxuriant vegetation. He leaned his elbows on the table and rested his head 
between his hands, counting the beats of his temples. ” 

Gabriel was silent. 

The horse was whipped up and the cab rattled off along the quay amid a chorus 
of laughter and adieus. 

“Ah, there’s no friends like the old friends,” she said, “when all is 
said and done, no friends that a body can trust. The recollection brightened 
his eyes. The noise of the hall became more audible. 

“It’s very kind of you to bring him home,” she said. His father's jibes 
at the Bantry gang leaped out of his memory. The duties of the priest towards 
the Eucharist and towards the secrecy of the confessional seemed so grave to me 
that I wondered how anybody had ever found in himself the courage to undertake 
them; and I was not surprised when he told me that the fathers of the Church 
had written books as thick as the _Post Office Directory_ and as closely 
printed as the law notices in the newspaper, elucidating all these intricate 
questions. 

The coming of September did not trouble him this year for he was not to be sent 
back to Clongowes. The seats were being filled up rapidly and a pleasant noise 
circulated in the auditorium. In earthly prisons the poor captive has at least 
some liberty of movement, were it only within the four walls of his cell or in 
the gloomy yard of his prison. On lifting the lid of the desk a faint fragrance 
escaped--the fragrance of new cedarwood pencils or of a bottle of gum or of an 
overripe apple which might have been left there and forgotten. No sound of 
footsteps came up or down the road. Let no worldly shame hold you back. Do you 
love your mother? 

Stephen shook his head slowly. If you think I have an excrementitious 
intelligence run after Donovan and ask him to listen to you. Old then. Then 
said: 

--Ah, there must be terrible queer creatures at the latter end of the world. 

She was an active, practical woman of middle age. 

--Is it Christy? he said. 

The acclamation which followed was taken up beyond the door of the supper-room 
by many of the other guests and renewed time after time, Freddy Malins acting 
as officer with his fork on high. First you must take your degree. He had a 
notion that he was being had. He felt only an ache of soul and body, his whole 
being, memory, will, understanding, flesh, benumbed and weary. And when he had 
tried to open Mr Casey's hand to see if the purse of silver was hidden there he 
had seen that the fingers could not be straightened out: and Mr Casey had told 
him that he had got those three cramped fingers making a birthday present for 
Queen Victoria. Do you know that? 

--Are you? asked Stephen. 

--I don't know what your words mean, he said simply. 

--PERNOBILIS ET PERVETUSTA FAMILIA, Temple said to Stephen. Who is this boy? 
Why is he on his knees? What is your name, boy? 

--Fleming, sir. 

--Newman, I think. At the crest of the hill at Inchicore sightseers had 
gathered in clumps to watch the cars careering homeward and through this 
channel of poverty and inaction the Continent sped its wealth and industry. 
Whenever any job was vacant a friend was always ready to give him the hard 
word. ” 

She had consented to go away, to leave her home. I hope to goodness he didn’t 
hear me. P. ” 

“O, yes, positively,” said Little Chandler. ” 

“I love the look of snow,” said Aunt Julia sadly. 

“The German cardinal wouldn’t submit. That's a fine invention too. In a 
bake, indeed! I think it's quite enough that you're taking a part in his bally 
old play. He passed unchallenged among the docks and along the quays wondering 
at the multitude of corks that lay bobbing on the surface of the water in a 
thick yellow scum, at the crowds of quay porters and the rumbling carts and the 
ill-dressed bearded policeman. No help! No help! He--he himself--his body to 
which he had yielded was dying. He turned his eyes to the grey gleaming river, 
winding along towards Dublin. He told her the names of the ships he had been on 
and the names of the different services. No touch of sin would linger upon the 
hands with which he would elevate and break the host; no touch of sin would 
linger on his lips in prayer to make him eat and drink damnation to himself not 
discerning the body of the Lord. He turned his olive face, equine in 
expression, towards Stephen, inviting him to speak again. But then they got hot 
and then he could sleep. It was a night for hot punches. 

At the far end of the shed near the street a speck of pink light showed in the 
darkness and as he walked towards it he became aware of a faint aromatic odour. 
” 

Little Chandler ordered the drinks. Tiresome old red-nosed imbecile! 

It was late when I fell asleep. 

“I have my own theory about it,” he said. They allowed a handful of 
foreigners to subject them. Ségouin was in good humour because he had 
unexpectedly received some orders in advance (he was about to start a motor 
establishment in Paris) and Rivière was in good humour because he was to be 
appointed manager of the establishment; these two young men (who were cousins) 
were also in good humour because of the success of the French cars. Villona was 
in good humour because he had had a very satisfactory luncheon; and besides he 
was an optimist by nature. The fourth member of the party, however, was too 
excited to be genuinely happy. The personality of the artist, at first a cry or 
a cadence or a mood and then a fluid and lambent narrative, finally refines 
itself out of existence, impersonalizes itself, so to speak. 

He watched their flight; bird after bird: a dark flash, a swerve, a flutter of 
wings. 

A tall boy behind Stephen rubbed his hands and said: 

--That's game ball. They closed round him in a ring, pushing one against 
another to hear. They must direct their flocks. Jimmy understood that the game 
lay between Routh and Ségouin. Moreover Ségouin had the unmistakable air of 
wealth. Jimmy set out to translate into days’ work that lordly car in which 
he sat. But it was his own fault for he frequently mistook his cards and the 
other men had to calculate his I. 

The bell rang and then the classes began to file out of the rooms and along the 
corridors towards the refectory. 

Mr Crofton sat down on a box and looked fixedly at the other bottle on the hob. 
It was a Firbolg in the borrowed cloak of a Milesian; and he thought of his 
friend Davin, the peasant student. But now it sounded to me like the name of 
some maleficent and sinful being. Masked memories passed quickly before him: he 
recognized scenes and persons yet he was conscious that he had failed to 
perceive some vital circumstance in them. He saw himself walking about the 
grounds watching the sports in Clongowes and eating slim jim out of his cricket 
cap. No one knew how he achieved the stern task of living, but his name was 
vaguely associated with racing tissues. He would hold his secret knowledge and 
secret power, being as sinless as the innocent, and he would be a priest for 
ever according to the order of Melchisedec. 

--There's a crack of the whip left in me yet, Stephen, old chap, said Mr 
Dedalus, poking at the dull fire with fierce energy. We went into Butler’s in 
Moore Street--faith, I was genuinely moved, tell you the God’s truth--and I 
remember well his very words. 

At this Stephen forgot the silent vows he had been making and burst out: 

--Tennyson a poet! Why, he's only a rhymester! 

--O, get out! said Heron. 

--O, Holy Paul, I forgot about Maurice, said Mr Dedalus. “A wing or a slice 
of the breast?” 

“Just a small slice of the breast. ”. And Johnny used to work in the old 
gentleman’s mill, walking round and round in order to drive the mill. I too 
listened; but there was no sound in the house: and I knew that the old priest 
was lying still in his coffin as we had seen him, solemn and truculent in 
death, an idle chalice on his breast. Then, in that case, all the rest, all 
that I thought I thought and all that I felt I felt, all the rest before now, 
in fact. 

The director had begun to speak of the dominican and franciscan orders and of 
the friendship between saint Thomas and saint Bonaventure. A tiny light 
twinkled at the pierhead where the ship was entering: and he saw a multitude of 
people gathered by the waters' edge to see the ship that was entering their 
harbour. 

“Someone you were in love with?” he asked ironically. Then, blushing 
slightly, he laid his hand on Lynch's thick tweed sleeve. . . . Thank you, 
indeed. ” 

“Are you right now?” 

“All right, thanks. ” 

“He looks quite resigned,” said my aunt. I’ll talk to Martin. . . ? 



He repeated to himself the lines of Shelley's fragment. 

--Um, Cranly said as before. . It’s not exactly a sermon, you know. ” 

“But look here, John,” said Mr O’Connor. The proposal conveyed very 
little meaning to his mind but, understanding that some spiritual agencies were 
about to concern themselves on his behalf, he thought he owed it to his dignity 
to show a stiff neck. All life would be choked off, noiselessly: birds, men, 
elephants, pigs, children: noiselessly floating corpses amid the litter of the 
wreckage of the world. Even that night as he stumbled homewards along Jones's 
Road he had felt that some power was divesting him of that sudden-woven anger 
as easily as a fruit is divested of its soft ripe peel. But while they are 
everlasting they are at the same time, as you know, intolerably intense, 
unbearably extensive. A match of four was arranged, Cranly insisting, however, 
that his ball should be used. The party was to dine together that evening in 
Ségouin’s hotel and, meanwhile, Jimmy and his friend, who was staying with 
him, were to go home to dress. Mr Kernan came of Protestant stock and, though 
he had been converted to the Catholic faith at the time of his marriage, he had 
not been in the pale of the Church for twenty years. 

“Another time,” said the young man. He had sinned. He cursed his want of 
money and cursed all the rounds he had stood, particularly all the whiskies and 
Apollinaris which he had stood to Weathers. Then, almost at the instant of that 
touch, almost at the verge of sinful consent, he found himself standing far 
away from the flood upon a dry shore, saved by a sudden act of the will or a 
sudden ejaculation; and, seeing the silver line of the flood far away and 
beginning again its slow advance towards his feet, a new thrill of power and 
satisfaction shook his soul to know that he had not yielded nor undone all. She 
was a stout feeble old woman with white hair. She asked the stewards was any 
member of the Committee in the hall and, after a great deal of trouble, a 
steward brought out a little woman named Miss Beirne to whom Mrs Kearney 
explained that she wanted to see one of the secretaries. . . But tell me 
something about yourself. Their master had received his death-wound on the 
battlefield of Prague far away over the sea. He had always passed without 
turning his head to look. He could not see. 

Suddenly he became aware of something in the doorway. At the end were pictures 
of big nobs. He stood still to listen. He would know obscure things, hidden 
from others, from those who were conceived and born children of wrath. Now I 
knew they were true. 

The priest rose and, turning towards the altar, knelt upon the step before the 
tabernacle in the fallen gloom. But all the same it was queer what Athy said 
and the way he said it. Mrs Kearney repeated: 

“She won’t go on without her money. Her house had a floating population 
made up of tourists from Liverpool and the Isle of Man and, occasionally, 
_artistes_ from the music-halls. To follow the voice, without looking at the 
singer’s face, was to feel and share the excitement of swift and secure 
flight. Farther in front sat Mr Hendrick, the chief reporter of _The 
Freeman’s Journal_, and poor O’Carroll, an old friend of Mr Kernan’s, who 
had been at one time a considerable commercial figure. Gradually, as he 
recognised familiar faces, Mr Kernan began to feel more at home. Life became a 
divine gift for every moment and sensation of which, were it even the sight of 
a single leaf hanging on the twig of a tree, his soul should praise and thank 
the Giver. The world for all its solid substance and complexity no longer 
existed for his soul save as a theorem of divine power and love and 
universality. He knew that the tale was a prelude and his mind waited for the 
sequel. 

The Priest was silent. Stephen, seeing and hearing the hotel keeper through his 
father's face and voice, laughed. 

It was unfair and cruel because the doctor had told him not to read without 
glasses and he had written home to his father that morning to send him a new 
pair. Tried to read three reviews. Useless. She is not out yet. To keep the 
audience continually diverted she slipped the doubtful items in between the old 
favourites. Gabriel applauded loudly with all the others at the close of the 
song and loud applause was borne in from the invisible supper-table. 

“Yes, Lily,” he answered, “and I think we’re in for a night of it. The 
deep low collar and the Eton jacket made him feel queer and oldish: and that 
morning when his mother had brought him down to the parlour, dressed for mass, 
his father had cried. Two penitents rose and entered the confessional at either 
side. 

--Here comes the noble Dedalus! cried a high throaty voice. 

“O, what a pity!” she cried. 

--That thought is not mine, he said to himself quickly. ” 

She paused for a moment to get her voice under control and then went on: 

“Then the night before I left I was in my grandmother’s house in Nuns’ 
Island, packing up, and I heard gravel thrown up against the window. 

“Righto!” said Mr Cunningham promptly. Buy that lovely bunch. Will you, 
gentleman? 

The blue flowers which she lifted towards him and her young blue eyes seemed to 
him at that instant images of guilelessness, and he halted till the image had 
vanished and he saw only her ragged dress and damp coarse hair and hoydenish 
face. The air was very silent and you could hear the cricket bats but more 
slowly than before: pick, pock. Soon all would be dark and sleeping. After 
supper in the study hall he would change the number pasted up inside his desk 
from seventy-seven to seventy-six. As he walked on slowly, timing his pace to 
theirs, he watched Corley’s head which turned at every moment towards the 
young woman’s face like a big ball revolving on a pivot. 

“I’m not done with you yet,” she said. 

Freddy Malins bade the Misses Morkan good-evening in what seemed an offhand 
fashion by reason of the habitual catch in his voice and then, seeing that Mr 
Browne was grinning at him from the sideboard, crossed the room on rather shaky 
legs and began to repeat in an undertone the story he had just told to Gabriel. 
“There was some life in it then. ” 

The room was silent again. ” 

“There was many a good man went to the penny-a-week school with a sod of turf 
under his oxter,” said Mr Kernan sententiously. Someone opened the door of 
the room and called out: 

“Hello! Is this a Freemasons’ meeting?” 

“Who’s that?” said the old man. 

“I wonder where did they dig her up,” said Kathleen to Miss Healy. The 
chill and order of the life repelled him. . ” 

“It’s when it’s all over that you’ll miss him,” said my aunt. 

Eliza closed her eyes and shook her head slowly. We were serious to the point 
of solemnity, but once during the short voyage our eyes met and we laughed. 
Mahony’s big sister was to write an excuse for him and Leo Dillon was to tell 
his brother to say he was sick. We arranged to go along the Wharf Road until we 
came to the ships, then to cross in the ferryboat and walk out to see the 
Pigeon House. 

We came then near the river. He rolled its body, tender yet brittle as a grain 
of rice, between thumb and finger for an instant before he let it fall from him 
and wondered would it live or die. He ate his dinner with surly appetite and 
when the meal was over and the grease-strewn plates lay abandoned on the table, 
he rose and went to the window, clearing the thick scum from his mouth with his 
tongue and licking it from his lips. He stands and looks at the people while I 
do the talking. Yes. His face was handsome and his body was strong and hard. He 
was well informed. In the course of the evening, Mrs Kearney learned that the 
Friday concert was to be abandoned and that the Committee was going to move 
heaven and earth to secure a bumper house on Saturday night. At the very 
instant of death the bonds of the flesh are broken asunder and the soul at once 
flies towards God as towards the centre of her existence. Rain was drizzling 
down on the cold streets and, when they reached the Ballast Office, Farrington 
suggested the Scotch House. The bar was full of men and loud with the noise of 
tongues and glasses. 

In the hall the children who had stayed latest were putting on their things: 
the party was over. All serene, Simon, said the old man tranquilly. The granite 
stone of the bridge was beginning to be warm and I began to pat it with my 
hands in time to an air in my head. I HOPE I AM NOT DETAINING YOU. 

--No, by God! asserted Mr Dedalus. It's not right. Do you use a holder? 

--I don't smoke, answered Stephen. 

--But do you know, Temple went on, what I think of you and of myself compared 
together? 

--Out with it, Temple! the stout student cried from the steps. 

--Lynch puts out his chest, said Stephen, as a criticism of life. 

--And thanks be to God, Johnny, said Mr Dedalus, that we lived so long and did 
so little harm. Frank was very kind, manly, open-hearted. He would save her. He 
would know obscure things, hidden from others, from those who were conceived 
and born children of wrath. 

When their turn to cross had come he was still perplexed and inattentive. 

--He was the handsomest man in Cork at that time, by God he was! The women used 
to stand to look after him in the street. On Saturday evenings when my aunt 
went marketing I had to go to carry some of the parcels. 

“_Credo!_” said Mr Cunningham. Useless. From without as from within the 
waters had flowed over his barriers: their tides began once more to jostle 
fiercely above the crumbled mole. The light spread upwards from the glass roof 
making the theatre seem a festive ark, anchored among the hulks of houses, her 
frail cables of lanterns looping her to her moorings. Desisting from this, he 
began to wander about the far end of the field, aimlessly. 

After an interval the man spoke to me. 

--Where? asked Stephen. Some died. I went to the stern and tried to decipher 
the legend upon it but, failing to do so, I came back and examined the foreign 
sailors to see had any of them green eyes for I had some confused notion. . 
peculiar cases. . the----” 

“The body,” said Mr Cunningham. 

“Yes, in the back near the door. He hardly knew where he was walking. He 
shook the poker gravely and nodded his head at the fellow out of third of 
grammar. He had fallen on his feet in Buenos Ayres, he said, and had come over 
to the old country just for a holiday. Supreme Judge, from His sentence there 
will be and can be no appeal. He calls the just to His side, bidding them enter 
into the kingdom, the eternity of bliss prepared for them. And you, Stephen, 
have been such a boy in this college, prefect of Our Blessed Lady's sodality. 



* * * * * 



He could wait no longer. The other boys bent over their theme-books and began 
to write. The moon was blood-red. When we returned to the street light from the 
kitchen windows had filled the areas. In the profane world, as he foresaw, a 
worldly voice would bid him raise up his father's fallen state by his labours 
and, meanwhile, the voice of his school comrades urged him to be a decent 
fellow, to shield others from blame or to beg them off and to do his best to 
get free days for the school. 

They drove down Dame Street. Soon they were all quite merry again and Mrs 
Donnelly said Maria would enter a convent before the year was out because she 
had got the prayer-book. Maria had never seen Joe so nice to her as he was that 
night, so full of pleasant talk and reminiscences. ” 

But Maria said she had brought something special for papa and mamma, something 
they would be sure to like, and she began to look for her plumcake. 

“That affected his mind,” she said. He had sinned. His friends asked him 
had he seen Corley and what was the latest. But he played too fiercely for us 
who were younger and more timid. What birds were they? He thought that they 
must be swallows who had come back from the south. He began to mimic his 
son’s flat accent, saying half to himself: _“At the chapel. He had money 
enough to settle down on; it was not that. 

--Do you think so? asked Mr Dedalus. AMEN. 

Stephen sat in the front bench of the chapel. 

--Quite right! said the rector. 

There was a silence while he ate. 

--Give me a kiss, she said. Mr Holohan began to pace up and down the room, in 
order to cool himself for he felt his skin on fire. Madam Glynn took her stand 
in a corner of the room, holding a roll of music stiffly before her and from 
time to time changing the direction of her startled gaze. The shadow took her 
faded dress into shelter but fell revengefully into the little cup behind her 
collar-bone. At once from every part of his being unrest began to irradiate. At 
four o’clock he was set free. 

While his forehead was being wrinkled and his jaws painted black and blue by 
the elderly man, he listened distractedly to the voice of the plump young 
jesuit which bade him speak up and make his points clearly. If the lamp smokes 
or smells I shall try to trim it. 

--It is religion, Dante said. For what, he asked her, with careful scorn. By 
paying a small sum every week into a society, he ensured for both his daughters 
a dowry of one hundred pounds each when they came to the age of twenty-four. 

But why in the square? You went there when you wanted to do something. AMEN. 

The preacher began to speak in a quiet friendly tone. 

Stephen felt his heart filled by Fleming's words and did not answer. I 
remembered that I had noticed long velvet curtains and a swinging lamp of 
antique fashion. 

But he did neither: and, when he was sitting alone in the deserted tram, he 
tore his ticket into shreds and stared gloomily at the corrugated footboard. 

“Half-seven at M’Auley’s be it!” 

There was a short silence. Then he smiled and said: 

--O, well, it was a mistake; I am sure Father Dolan did not know. The cabbage 
began to deposit a cold white grease on his plate. Great applause greeted Mary 
Jane as, blushing and rolling up her music nervously, she escaped from the 
room. Every day he drew up a bill of fare for the family and every night led a 
party of three or four to the theatre to see INGOMAR or THE LADY OF LYONS. It 
was true. But that did not make him a West Briton surely. Nor can nature escape 
from these intense and various tortures by succumbing to them for the soul is 
sustained and maintained in evil so that its suffering may be the greater. 
Boundless extension of torment, incredible intensity of suffering, unceasing 
variety of torture--this is what the divine majesty, so outraged by sinners, 
demands; this is what the holiness of heaven, slighted and set aside for the 
lustful and low pleasures of the corrupt flesh, requires; this is what the 
blood of the innocent Lamb of God, shed for the redemption of sinners, trampled 
upon by the vilest of the vile, insists upon. 

--Last and crowning torture of all the tortures of that awful place is the 
eternity of hell. Her hands clutched the iron in frenzy. She held an open book 
on her knees and was pointing out something in it to Constantine who, dressed 
in a man-o’-war suit, lay at her feet. There were worse husbands. 

The first part of the concert was very successful except for Madam Glynn’s 
item. He was fussing at the hallstand, looking for the hat-brush, and answered 
me curtly: 

“Yes, boy, I know. When he went in by the side-door he found the kitchen 
empty and the kitchen fire nearly out. He hid under the table. He was not 
without culture. He moaned to himself like some baffled prowling beast. That 
was called politics. 

He offended the majesty of God by the sinful thought of one instant and God 
cast him out of heaven into hell for ever. By God, I’ll say for you, Joe! No, 
by God, you stuck to him like a man!” 

“O, Joe,” said Mr O’Connor suddenly. 

But why in the square? You went there when you wanted to do something. Mr 
Holohan began to pace up and down the room, in order to cool himself for he 
felt his skin on fire. The others accepted under protest. Yes, the newspapers 
were right: snow was general all over Ireland. 

The air of the room chilled his shoulders. But he turned again to Stephen and 
said with a sudden eagerness: 

--That word is a most interesting word. We were chatting, you know, and one 
word borrowed another. 

At this Stephen forgot the silent vows he had been making and burst out: 

--Tennyson a poet! Why, he's only a rhymester! 

--O, get out! said Heron. I want to go home. . ?” I said. “Do you know what 
my private and candid opinion is about some of those little jokers? I believe 
half of them are in the pay of the Castle. ” 

“There’s no knowing,” said the old man. Safe home. ” 

“Good-night. Gabriel waited again and then, fearing that diffidence was about 
to conquer him, he said abruptly: 

“By the way, Gretta!” 

“What is it?” 

“You know that poor fellow Malins?” he said quickly. She lived with her 
married daughter in Glasgow and came to Dublin on a visit once a year. Her name 
was Mrs Sinico. Her nakedness yielded to him, radiant, warm, odorous and 
lavish-limbed, enfolded him like a shining cloud, enfolded him like water with 
a liquid life; and like a cloud of vapour or like waters circumfluent in space 
the liquid letters of speech, symbols of the element of mystery, flowed forth 
over his brain. One day he caught a beautiful big fish and the man in the hotel 
cooked it for their dinner. At this Lenehan said that he had been with Mac the 
night before in Egan’s. 

--You are a great stranger now. Gabriel threw his overcoat and hat on a couch 
and crossed the room towards the window. 

“Yes, Lily,” he answered, “and I think we’re in for a night of it. 

“. 

He enunciated the word and then drank gravely. When their faces had flushed 
with the struggle they drew apart, panting. The image, it is clear, must be set 
between the mind or senses of the artist himself and the mind or senses of 
others. That was because he was thinking of his own father. Every rat had two 
eyes to look out of. Sleek slimy coats, little little feet tucked up to jump, 
black slimy eyes to look out of. They could understand how to jump. 

He would fade into something impalpable under her eyes and then in a moment he 
would be transfigured. 

“Ah,” he said, “you may say what you like. I tell you. Please come and 
take me home. I am in the infirmary. I could not call my wandering thoughts 
together. Was that not desire? 

--I speak of normal natures, said Stephen. The instant flashed forth like a 
point of light and now from cloud on cloud of vague circumstance confused form 
was veiling softly its afterglow. The fellows said it was made of whalebone and 
leather with lead inside: and he wondered what was the pain like. His very 
brain was sick and powerless. While he did so he sang softly to himself with 
quaint accent and phrasing: 



'Tis youth and folly Makes young men marry, So here, my love, I'll No longer 
stay. When he learned that the young girl beside her was her daughter he judged 
her to be a year or so younger than himself. ” 

Mr O’Connor, a grey-haired young man, whose face was disfigured by many 
blotches and pimples, had just brought the tobacco for a cigarette into a 
shapely cylinder but when spoken to he undid his handiwork meditatively. Then 
he mumbled good-night and went out. ” 

“Yes, that’s it,” said Mr Cunningham, “Jack and I and M’Coy 
here--we’re all going to wash the pot. He was a Castle official only during 
office hours. Dante, Parnell, Clane, Clongowes. A little boy had been taught 
geography by an old woman who kept two brushes in her wardrobe. The yellow 
gas-flames arose before his troubled vision against the vapoury sky, burning as 
if before an altar. The wind of the last day blew through his mind, his sins, 
the jewel-eyed harlots of his imagination, fled before the hurricane, squeaking 
like mice in their terror and huddled under a mane of hair. 

--I have sometimes thought of it, said Stephen. 

After a pause Cranly asked: 

--What age is your mother? 

--Not old, Stephen said. And you invite me to be one of you. The letters of the 
name of Dublin lay heavily upon his mind, pushing one another surlily hither 
and thither with slow boorish insistence. 

In the hall the children who had stayed latest were putting on their things: 
the party was over. It is a good evening. Thanks to her, Constantine was now 
senior curate in Balbrigan and, thanks to her, Gabriel himself had taken his 
degree in the Royal University. 

Stephen watched the three glasses being raised from the counter as his father 
and his two cronies drank to the memory of their past. For the first time in 
his life he felt himself superior to the people he passed. By paying a small 
sum every week into a society, he ensured for both his daughters a dowry of one 
hundred pounds each when they came to the age of twenty-four. He wondered how 
his father, whom he knew for a shrewd suspicious man, could be duped by the 
servile manners of the porter; and the lively southern speech which had 
entertained him all the morning now irritated his ears. Every year in the month 
of July Mrs Kearney found occasion to say to some friend: 

“My good man is packing us off to Skerries for a few weeks. No, no. He was 
not foxing. Then, raising the umbrella in salute, he said to all: 

--Good evening, sirs. 

He struck the flags again and tittered while his head trembled with a slight 
nervous movement. He could see nothing there. His conversation was mainly about 
himself: what he had said to such a person and what such a person had said to 
him and what he had said to settle the matter. 

It would be beautiful to die if God so willed. The desire and loathing excited 
by improper esthetic means are really not esthetic emotions not only because 
they are kinetic in character but also because they are not more than physical. 
Everyone roared laughing when he showed the way in which Mr Alleyne shook his 
fist in Farrington’s face. Mary Jane settled down quietly to her supper but 
Aunt Kate and Aunt Julia were still toddling round the table, walking on each 
other’s heels, getting in each other’s way and giving each other unheeded 
orders. Freddy Malins, with his hat well back on his head and his shoulders 
humped with cold, was puffing and steaming after his exertions. The explanation 
was not very clear for Mr Browne grinned and said: 

“I like that idea very much but wouldn’t a comfortable spring bed do them 
as well as a coffin?” 

“The coffin,” said Mary Jane, “is to remind them of their last end. 
O’Halloran stood a round and then Farrington stood another round, Weathers 
protesting that the hospitality was too Irish. Weathers made them all have just 
one little tincture at his expense and promised to meet them later on at 
Mulligan’s in Poolbeg Street. 

When the Scotch House closed they went round to Mulligan’s. Stephen laughed 
and said: 

--He has a curious idea of genders if he thinks a bitch is masculine. The 
images of the dead were all strangers to him save that of uncle Charles, an 
image which had lately been fading out of memory. A silence filled the 
classroom and Stephen, glancing timidly at Father Arnall's dark face, saw that 
it was a little red from the wax he was in. Before a curtain, over which the 
words _Café Chantant_ were written in coloured lamps, two men were counting 
money on a salver. She told too of certain changes they had seen in her of late 
and of her odd ways and sayings. She thought her plans over. Her long slender 
bare legs were delicate as a crane's and pure save where an emerald trail of 
seaweed had fashioned itself as a sign upon the flesh. Her husband’s 
great-great-grandfather had come from Leghorn. No, it was not the moment yet. 

He began to feel that he had wronged her. 

--Good day, sir, said Stephen. 

Your eyes have set man's heart ablaze And you have had your will of him. Old 
father, old artificer, stand me now and ever in good stead. Mulrennan spoke 
Irish. Then old man and Mulrennan spoke English. She would turn and look at 
him. Amen. 

The preacher began to speak in a quiet friendly tone. The frail gay sound smote 
his heart more strongly than a trumpet blast, and, not daring to lift his eyes, 
he turned aside and gazed, as he walked, into the shadow of the tangled shrubs. 
He loved to feel the covers and turn over the pages of newly printed books. A 
great saint, saint Francis Xavier! A great soldier of God! 

The rector paused and then, shaking his clasped hands before him, went on: 

--He had the faith in him that moves mountains. 

“Mr D’Arcy,” she said, “what is the name of that song you were 
singing?” 

“It’s called _The Lass of Aughrim_,” said Mr D’Arcy, “but I 
couldn’t remember it properly. “God knows we done all we could, as poor as 
we are--we wouldn’t see him want anything while he was in it. ” 

Nannie had leaned her head against the sofa-pillow and seemed about to fall 
asleep. ” 

“Allow me,” said Mr Cunningham positively, “it was _Lux upon Lux_. 

“Yes,” said Mr Cunningham. He opened it cautiously with his left hand lest 
he should waken the child and began to read the first poem in the book: 



_Hushed are the winds and still the evening gloom, Not e’en a Zephyr wanders 
through the grove, Whilst I return to view my Margaret’s tomb And scatter 
flowers on the dust I love. Mrs Malins, who had been silent all through the 
supper, said that her son was going down to Mount Melleray in a week or so. She 
stood still for an instant like an angry stone image and, when the first notes 
of the song struck her ear, she caught up her daughter’s cloak and said to 
her husband: 

“Get a cab!” 

He went out at once. 

It was the last tram. 

Stephen looked at the faces of the fellows but they were all looking across the 
playground. 







XXVI 

Thou leanest to the shell of night, Dear lady, a divining ear. Saint Thomas, 
the greatest doctor of the church, the angelic doctor, as he is called, says 
that the worst damnation consists in this, that the understanding of man is 
totally deprived of divine light and his affection obstinately turned away from 
the goodness of God. These devils, who were once beautiful angels, have become 
as hideous and ugly as they once were beautiful. We can have no idea of how 
horrible these devils are. Such booing and baaing, man, you never heard. 
Villona was entertaining also--a brilliant pianist--but, unfortunately, very 
poor. Then an impromptu square dance, the men devising original figures. They 
can wait. But the only thing they would not stand was back answers. First of 
all there was her disreputable father and then her mother’s boarding house 
was beginning to get a certain fame. It was like a train going in and out of 
tunnels and that was like the noise of the boys eating in the refectory when 
you opened and closed the flaps of the ears. But how so quickly? By seeing or 
by thinking of seeing. 

--He came. ” 

She would not cry many tears at leaving the Stores. ” 

“Can’t you see that I’m as hoarse as a crow?” said Mr D’Arcy roughly. 
. _ 

It was useless. Her eyes, which were grey with a shade of green through them, 
had a habit of glancing upwards when she spoke with anyone, which made her look 
like a little perverse madonna. She held one of the spikes, bowing her head 
towards me. As she was naturally pale and unbending in manner she made few 
friends at school. Neither he nor she had had any such adventure before and 
neither was conscious of any incongruity. ” 

Mr Henchy waited a few moments and then nodded in the direction of the door. 
” 

Mrs Conroy laughed. The blush which had risen to his face a few moments before 
was establishing itself. In the middle of the vestry a young jesuit, who was 
then on a visit to the college, stood rocking himself rhythmically from the 
tips of his toes to his heels and back again, his hands thrust well forward 
into his side-pockets. Then she had to rush out as quickly as she could and do 
her marketing, holding her black leather purse tightly in her hand as she 
elbowed her way through the crowds and returning home late under her load of 
provisions. He asked in a suspicious provincial accent: 

“Who is the man? What’s his name and address?” 

A young man in a cycling-suit cleared his way through the ring of bystanders. 
His confession would be long, long. He was laughing heartily in a high key at a 
story which he had been telling Gabriel on the stairs and at the same time 
rubbing the knuckles of his left fist backwards and forwards into his left eye. 
And you, Stephen, have been such a boy in this college, prefect of Our Blessed 
Lady's sodality. I wouldn't care a bit, by Jove. But the grey face still 
followed me. Ireland first, Stevie. 

Davin rose from his box and went towards the players, shaking his head sadly. 
He was sick then. Rody Kickham was not like that: he would be captain of the 
third line all the fellows said. Nasty Roche had big hands. They said they 
could not drink the tea; that it was hogwash. He would fail with them just as 
he had failed with the girl in the pantry. He allowed himself to think that in 
certain circumstances he would rob his bank but, as these circumstances never 
arose, his life rolled out evenly--an adventureless tale. No help! No help! 
He--he himself--his body to which he had yielded was dying. He had known 
neither the pleasure of companionship with others nor the vigour of rude male 
health nor filial piety. 

Mr Cunningham was the very man for such a case. Father Arnall rose from his 
seat and went among them, helping the boys with gentle words and telling them 
the mistakes they had made. His voice was very gentle and soft. He said that 
when boys were that kind they ought to be whipped and well whipped. He was 
coming near the door. But Mr Gleeson had round shiny cuffs and clean white 
wrists and fattish white hands and the nails of them were long and pointed. 
Perhaps they had stolen a monstrance to run away with and sell it somewhere. 
But it was unfair and cruel. 

The prefect cried: 

--Quick march! Hayfoot! Strawfoot! 

They went together down the staircase and along the corridor and past the bath. 

--But we are just now in a mental world, Stephen continued. 

We were grave lovers. Ireland is the old sow that eats her farrow. 

Davin rose from his box and went towards the players, shaking his head sadly. 
Mr Holohan began to pace up and down the room, in order to cool himself for he 
felt his skin on fire. 

--I wish it would clear up. He waited till all in the chapel had knelt and 
every least noise was still. Gallaher was only patronising him by his 
friendliness just as he was patronising Ireland by his visit. 

The barman brought their drinks. 

“Tommy,” he said, “I see you haven’t changed an atom. 

--He was the handsomest man in Cork at that time, by God he was! The women used 
to stand to look after him in the street. There were five or six workingmen in 
the shop discussing the value of a gentleman’s estate in County Kildare. He 
felt cold and then a little hot: and he could see the names printed on the 
cocks. He knew the inner side of all affairs and was fond of delivering final 
judgments. Melancholy was the dominant note of his temperament, he thought, but 
it was a melancholy tempered by recurrences of faith and resignation and simple 
joy. If he could give expression to it in a book of poems perhaps men would 
listen. 

--It is religion, Dante said. I pray to God, and do you pray with me, that we 
may repent of our sins. Damn it now, what’s his name? Little chap with sandy 
hair. I’m deuced glad, I can tell you, to get back to the old country. 

“We’ll all renounce the devil,” he said, “together, not forgetting his 
works and pomps. “And little thanks you get for it, only impudence. ” 

“Ah, poor James!” said Eliza. It was Annie’s photograph. 

“And why can’t you?” I asked. I remembered that I had noticed long velvet 
curtains and a swinging lamp of antique fashion. Hell is Roman, like the walls 
of the Romans, strong and ugly. The straitness of this prison house is 
expressly designed by God to punish those who refused to be bound by His laws. 
On the last flight of stairs he passed Jack Mooney who was coming up from the 
pantry nursing two bottles of _Bass_. He was extremely nervous and extremely 
jealous of other tenors and he covered his nervous jealousy with an ebullient 
friendliness. Beside the savage desire within him to realize the enormities 
which he brooded on nothing was sacred. He bore cynically with the shameful 
details of his secret riots in which he exulted to defile with patience 
whatever image had attracted his eyes. You could die just the same on a sunny 
day. You had the minister of God to preach to you, to call you back when you 
had strayed, to forgive you your sins, no matter how many, how abominable, if 
only you had confessed and repented. That time is gone: gone for ever. Mary 
Jane, who was then a little girl in short clothes, was now the main prop of the 
household, for she had the organ in Haddington Road. Freddy Malins, with his 
hat well back on his head and his shoulders humped with cold, was puffing and 
steaming after his exertions. At last she was settled comfortably and Freddy 
Malins invited Mr Browne into the cab. She dealt with moral problems as a 
cleaver deals with meat: and in this case she had made up her mind. She looked 
at herself in profile and readjusted a hairpin above her ear. As soon as she 
could she excused herself and went out after him. Pray to our mother Mary to 
help you. She will help you, my child. Then she had her plants in the 
conservatory and she liked looking after them. 

--But I told him I broke them, sir, and he pandied me. An eternity of bliss in 
the company of the dean of studies? 

--Remember, Cranly said, that he would be glorified. The other houses of the 
street, conscious of decent lives within them, gazed at one another with brown 
imperturbable faces. 

“I’ll tell you my opinion,” said Ignatius Gallaher, emerging after some 
time from the clouds of smoke in which he had taken refuge, “it’s a rum 
world. But she would show them their mistake. If so, Cranly would not have 
spoken as he did. 

--It is religion, Dante said. “Did it come off?” 

They had reached the corner of Ely Place. Then with a grave gesture he extended 
a hand towards the light and, smiling, opened it slowly to the gaze of his 
disciple. She would turn and look at him. Her brother always teased her before 
he obeyed and I stood by the railings looking at her. 

They both kissed Gabriel frankly. He was called Little Chandler because, though 
he was but slightly under the average stature, he gave one the idea of being a 
little man. ” Miss Ivors had praised the review. 

Mary Jane brushed past the others and ran to the staircase, but before she 
reached it the singing stopped and the piano was closed abruptly. I quite see 
your point. 

He also tapped the portfolio and coughed gently and smiled. Mr Tate, the 
English master, pointed his finger at him and said bluntly: 

--This fellow has heresy in his essay. She stuck her ugly old face up at me 
when she said it and I had my mouth full of tobacco juice. She looked at 
herself in profile and readjusted a hairpin above her ear. All the lodgers in 
the house knew something of the affair; details had been invented by some. It 
was no use trying to say a word to him when he was with the chief clerk. He 
turned over the flyleaf and looked wearily at the green round earth in the 
middle of the maroon clouds. Then, raising his head, he repeated the act of 
contrition, phrase by phrase, with fervour. 

When he had eluded the flood of temptation many times in this way he grew 
troubled and wondered whether the grace which he had refused to lose was not 
being filched from him little by little. The priest's face was in total shadow, 
but the waning daylight from behind him touched the deeply grooved temples and 
the curves of the skull. He who utters it is more conscious of the instant of 
emotion than of himself as feeling emotion. There was nothing he liked, he 
said, so much as looking at a nice young girl, at her nice white hands and her 
beautiful soft hair. 

--Now it is all about politics in the papers, he said. 

The rain fell faster. 

“Yes. Heron did not trouble himself about an introduction but said instead: 

--I was just telling my friend Wallis what a lark it would be tonight if you 
took off the rector in the part of the schoolmaster. It would be a ripping good 
joke. At Westland Row Station a crowd of people pressed to the carriage doors; 
but the porters moved them back, saying that it was a special train for the 
bazaar. It was pleasant after that honour to return to the profane world of 
spectators amid nudges and significant looks. But now it sounded to me like the 
name of some maleficent and sinful being. The working-man is not looking for 
fat jobs for his sons and nephews and cousins. The master marked the sums and 
cuts to be done for the next lesson and went out. She wore a short black jacket 
with mother-of-pearl buttons and a ragged black boa. She felt a soft wet 
substance with her fingers and was surprised that nobody spoke or took off her 
bandage. In the purse were two half-crowns and some coppers. I drew the 
blankets over my head and tried to think of Christmas. ” 

“I’d like nothing better this minute,” said Mr Browne stoutly, “than a 
rattling fine walk in the country or a fast drive with a good spanking goer 
between the shafts. . . . . . . . . nearly. He still bought a copy of 
_Reynolds’s Newspaper_ every week but he attended to his religious duties and 
for nine-tenths of the year lived a regular life. 

He remembered the books of poetry upon his shelves at home. He felt quite at 
ease now for he was an expert carver and liked nothing better than to find 
himself at the head of a well-laden table. That was mean of Wells to shoulder 
him into the square ditch because he would not swop his little snuff box for 
Wells's seasoned hacking chestnut, the conqueror of forty. And then when all 
were vested he had stood holding out the boat to the rector and the rector had 
put a spoonful of incense in it and it had hissed on the red coals. 

He could hear the tolling. 

--Your father, said the little old man to Stephen, was the boldest flirt in the 
City of Cork in his day. “You saw the lady fall?” 

_Witness_. Then they’ll make you Lord Mayor. She sang _I Dreamt that I 
Dwelt_, and when she came to the second verse she sang again: 



_I dreamt that I dwelt in marble halls With vassals and serfs at my side And of 
all who assembled within those walls That I was the hope and the pride. She 
pushed the decanter towards him, saying: 

“Now, help yourself, Mr Holohan!” 

And while he was helping himself she said: 

“Don’t be afraid! Don’t be afraid of it!” 

Everything went on smoothly. She had said that pockets were funny things to 
have: and then all of a sudden she had broken away and had run laughing down 
the sloping curve of the path. I was too hairy to tell her that. He had studied 
in the Irish college in Rome and he had taught me to pronounce Latin properly. 
She gripped with both hands at the iron railing. ” But what would grammar 
matter if he really loved her? He could not make up his mind whether to like 
her or despise her for what she had done. And Pius IX. 

--Did they listen? Yes, they listened but would not hear. He turned suddenly to 
the invalid and said: 

“D’ye know what, Tom, has just occurred to me? You night join in and we’d 
have a four-handed reel. 

Contrahit orator, variant in carmine vates. Who is this boy? Why is he on his 
knees? What is your name, boy? 

--Fleming, sir. 

The whisper ceased and he knew then clearly that his own soul had sinned in 
thought and word and deed wilfully through his own body. Not like the other 
tinker. ” 

The three men left the bar and the crowd sifted through the doors into the 
laneway. “Fire away, Joe. ” 

Mr Hynes did not seem to remember at once the piece to which they were alluding 
but, after reflecting a while, he said: 

“O, that thing is it. 

Mrs Kernan came to the door of the bedroom and announced: 

“Here’s a visitor for you!” 

“Who is it?” 

“Mr Fogarty. He knocked again more loudly and his heart jumped when he heard 
a muffled voice say: 

--Come in! 

He turned the handle and opened the door and fumbled for the handle of the 
green baize door inside. What’s the world coming to when sons speaks that way 
to their father?” 

“What age is he?” said Mr O’Connor. 

“Nineteen,” said the old man. 

“Sha, ‘s nothing,” said Mr Kernan, closing his mouth and pulling the 
collar of his filthy coat across his neck. “Such eyes as he had: big, dark 
eyes! And such an expression in them--an expression!” 

“O then, you were in love with him?” said Gabriel. 

“I used to go out walking with him,” she said, “when I was in Galway. Of 
course you know nothing,” said Mr Alleyne. She said she would do without any 
tea but when it came near the time at which the shop at the corner closed she 
decided to go out herself for a quarter of a pound of tea and two pounds of 
sugar. She stood on the curbstone, swinging a sunshade in one hand. His heart 
danced upon her movements like a cork upon a tide. When Mrs Kernan came into 
the room drying her hands she came into a solemn company. 

Outside Blackrock, on the road that led to the mountains, stood a small 
whitewashed house in the garden of which grew many rosebushes: and in this 
house, he told himself, another Mercedes lived. And that's what I call limbo. 
Darkness was falling. 

Darkness falls from the air. His silent watchful manner had grown upon him and 
he took little part in the games. His soul was swooning into some new world, 
fantastic, dim, uncertain as under sea, traversed by cloudy shapes and beings. 

When the plot had been disclosed to her, Mrs Kernan had said: 

“I leave it all in your hands, Mr Cunningham. 

--Certainly, said Dante. 









When the shy star goes forth in heaven All maidenly, disconsolate, Hear you 
amid the drowsy even One who is singing by your gate. He's very moist and 
watery about the dewlaps, God bless him. 

Mr Casey was still struggling through his fit of coughing and laughter. 

--What? cried Mr Dedalus. 

“You’ll put your head in the sack,” repeated Little Chandler stoutly, 
“like everyone else if you can find the girl. That's all I can say, said Mr 
Dedalus. Did you know? 

--Is it? Stephen said vaguely. 

--I did, Stephen answered. I’ll do the job right enough. I’ll do the 
retreat business and confession, and. All Dublin is raving about him. His mind 
bred vermin. 

Dante said: 

--O, if not, the eagles will come and pull out his eyes. She started to her 
feet and ran to the banisters. 

It was the last tram. That was his song. Then she said suddenly: 

“O, Mr Conroy, will you come for an excursion to the Aran Isles this summer? 
We’re going to stay there a whole month. Hell is a strait and dark and 
foul-smelling prison, an abode of demons and lost souls, filled with fire and 
smoke. There are no contraries or admixtures of any kind to temper or soften in 
the least the pains of hell. There were holly and ivy round the pierglass and 
holly and ivy, green and red, twined round the chandeliers. 

We blessed ourselves and came away. She was a woman who was quite able to keep 
things to herself: a determined woman. He sat listening to the words and 
following the ways of adventure that lay open in the coals, arches and vaults 
and winding galleries and jagged caverns. 

“Hello, Crofton!” said Mr Henchy to the fat man. You often heard me speak 
of the Groceries, didn't you, Stephen. I shall try to fly by those nets. 

He paused. I will not let any gloomy moralising intrude upon us here tonight. 
All day, all night, I hear them flowing To and fro. The brimstone, too, which 
burns there in such prodigious quantity fills all hell with its intolerable 
stench; and the bodies of the damned themselves exhale such a pestilential 
odour that, as saint Bonaventure says, one of them alone would suffice to 
infect the whole world. Stephen, his tongue cleaving to his palate, bowed his 
head, praying with his heart. 

Mr Dedalus put up his eyeglass and, staring down at him, said quietly and 
kindly: 

--What are you laughing at, you little puppy, you? 

The servants entered and placed the dishes on the table. In heart you are an 
Irish man but your pride is too powerful. 

This spirit of quarrelsome comradeship which he had observed lately in his 
rival had not seduced Stephen from his habits of quiet obedience. 

He looked at it without anger; for, though sloth of the body and of the soul 
crept over it like unseen vermin, over the shuffling feet and up the folds of 
the cloak and around the servile head, it seemed humbly conscious of its 
indignity. We spent a long time walking about the noisy streets flanked by high 
stone walls, watching the working of cranes and engines and often being shouted 
at for our immobility by the drivers of groaning carts. But I must leave 
tomorrow night. 

He stood still in the gloom of the hall, trying to catch the air that the voice 
was singing and gazing up at his wife. 

Stephen raised his cap as if in greeting. His mother put on the oilsheet. His 
soul was still disquieted and cast down by the dull phenomenon of Dublin. And 
still every morning he went into the city by tram and every evening walked home 
from the city after having dined moderately in George’s Street and read the 
evening paper for dessert. 

--Did they listen? Yes, they listened but would not hear. He peered in front of 
him and right and left through the gloom and thought that those must be 
portraits. He did not like Wells's face. Then replacing the jar in the locker 
he poured a little of the whisky into two glasses, added a little water and 
came back with them to the fireplace. A small gold coin shone in the palm. 
Moynihan murmured from behind in his natural voice: 

--Isn't MacAlister a devil for his pound of flesh? 

Stephen looked coldly on the oblong skull beneath him overgrown with tangled 
twine-coloured hair. He can have me. The vastness and strangeness of the life 
suggested to him by the bales of merchandise stocked along the walls or swung 
aloft out of the holds of steamers wakened again in him the unrest which had 
sent him wandering in the evening from garden to garden in search of Mercedes. 
That was because he was thinking of his own father. The clerk in Terry 
Kelly’s said _A crown!_ but the consignor held out for six shillings; and in 
the end the six shillings was allowed him literally. 

He frowned angrily upon his thought and on the shrivelled mannikin who had 
called it forth. 

After a pause Cranly asked: 

--What age is your mother? 

--Not old, Stephen said. “It’s Bartell D’Arcy singing and he wouldn’t 
sing all the night. O, I’ll get him to sing a song before he goes. ” 

“O do, Mary Jane,” said Aunt Kate. 

“Musha, God be with them times!” said the old man. 

He uncovered the dish boldly and said: 

--Now then, who's for more turkey? 

Nobody answered. But, temporal or spatial, the esthetic image is first 
luminously apprehended as selfbounded and selfcontained upon the immeasurable 
background of space or time which is not it. It was a text for business men and 
professional men. It seemed now to play itself, he and his fellow actors aiding 
it with their parts. 

He heard the voice of the prefect of the chapel saying the last prayers. 
“She’ll be there all right. I always let her wait a bit. 

--Try to be one of us, repeated Davin. You know that well. There was a book in 
the library about Holland. The soul of the gallant venal city which his elders 
had told him of had shrunk with time to a faint mortal odour rising from the 
earth and he knew that in a moment when he entered the sombre college he would 
be conscious of a corruption other than that of Buck Egan and Burnchapel 
Whaley. No! They wouldn’t have it!” 

“Ha!” said Mr M’Coy. 

“And they were a German cardinal by the name of Dolling. First you must take 
your degree. Set that before you as your first aim. Then, little by little, you 
will see your way. She was a stout feeble old woman with white hair. The first 
tenor and the contralto, however, brought down the house. While his mind had 
been pursuing its intangible phantoms and turning in irresolution from such 
pursuit he had heard about him the constant voices of his father and of his 
masters, urging him to be a gentleman above all things and urging him to be a 
good catholic above all things. Seeing the spectacle, he called out: 

“Hallo, Tom, old man! What’s the trouble?” 

“Sha, ‘s nothing,” said the man. 

The new-comer surveyed the deplorable figure before him and then turned to the 
constable, saying: 

“It’s all right, constable. 

--What I have said, he began again, refers to beauty in the wider sense of the 
word, in the sense which the word has in the literary tradition. Down far in 
the avenue she could hear a street organ playing. She knew the air. She forgot 
nothing and, thanks to her, everything that was to be done was done. Their 
conversation was evidently about Kathleen for they both glanced at her often as 
she stood chatting to one of her Nationalist friends, Miss Healy, the 
contralto. In one letter that he had written to her then he had said: “Why is 
it that words like these seem to me so dull and cold? Is it because there is no 
word tender enough to be your name?” 

Like distant music these words that he had written years before were borne 
towards him from the past. Amen. So be it. Apply to the jesuit theologian, Juan 
Mariana de Talavera, who will also explain to you in what circumstances you may 
lawfully kill your king and whether you had better hand him his poison in a 
goblet or smear it for him upon his robe or his saddlebow. Ask me rather would 
I suffer others to rob me, or if they did, would I call down upon them what I 
believe is called the chastisement of the secular arm? 

--And would you? 

--I think, Stephen said, it would pain me as much to do so as to be robbed. Who 
is the greatest writer, Dedalus? 

Stephen noted the mockery in the question and said: 

--Of prose do you mean? 

--Yes. 

--Hoho, Fleming! An idler of course. As soon as he was on the landing the man 
pulled a shepherd’s plaid cap out of his pocket, put it on his head and ran 
quickly down the rickety stairs. He halted a few paces from her and said: 

“What about the song? Why does that make you cry?” 

She raised her head from her arms and dried her eyes with the back of her hand 
like a child. But to drink the altar wine out of the press and be found out by 
the smell was a sin too: but it was not terrible and strange. Moreover, our 
earthly fire destroys at the same time as it burns, so that the more intense it 
is the shorter is its duration; but the fire of hell has this property, that it 
preserves that which it burns, and, though it rages with incredible intensity, 
it rages for ever. 

--Our earthly fire again, no matter how fierce or widespread it may be, is 
always of a limited extent; but the lake of fire in hell is boundless, 
shoreless and bottomless. It must be eleven, he thought, and peered into a 
dairy to see the time. He listened to Father Arnall's low and gentle voice as 
he corrected the themes. Supreme Judge, from His sentence there will be and can 
be no appeal. He calls the just to His side, bidding them enter into the 
kingdom, the eternity of bliss prepared for them. It was his wife. His arms 
trembled with anger and suddenly bending to the child’s face he shouted: 

“Stop!” 

The child stopped for an instant, had a spasm of fright and began to scream. 
Nice mother! The first day in the hall of the castle when she had said goodbye 
she had put up her veil double to her nose to kiss him: and her nose and eyes 
were red. But he had pretended not to see that she was going to cry. Perhaps 
that made her severe against Parnell. S. Gilbert. In one of his songs he speaks 
of the billiard sharp who is condemned to play: 



On a cloth untrue With a twisted cue And elliptical billiard balls. 











Uncle Charles smoked such black twist that at last his nephew suggested to him 
to enjoy his morning smoke in a little outhouse at the end of the garden. 

--Did they hurt you much? Nasty Roche asked. It shocked him to find in the 
outer world a trace of what he had deemed till then a brutish and individual 
malady of his own mind. 

He had wandered into a maze of narrow and dirty streets. 

--Look at that basket, he said. Church Street chapel. 

--Church? 

She shifted the can to her other hand and directed him; and, as she held out 
her reeking withered right hand under its fringe of shawl, he bent lower 
towards her, saddened and soothed by her voice. Any lazy idle loafers that want 
flogging in this class? 

He came to the middle of the class and saw Fleming on his knees. He waited in 
timorous silence to hear what Heron might say next. So he had sunk to the state 
of a beast that licks his chaps after meat. And though he trembled with cold 
and fright to think of the cruel long nails and of the high whistling sound of 
the cane and of the chill you felt at the end of your shirt when you undressed 
yourself yet he felt a feeling of queer quiet pleasure inside him to think of 
the white fattish hands, clean and strong and gentle. But that was not why 

A voice from far out on the playground cried: 

--All in! 

And other voices cried: 

--All in! All in! 

During the writing lesson he sat with his arms folded, listening to the slow 
scraping of the pens. 

The summer holidays were near at hand when I made up my mind to break out of 
the weariness of school-life for one day at least. I tell you. She set these on 
the table and invited us to take a little glass of wine. Gabriel asked her 
whether she had had a good crossing. Everyone protested loudly so that he 
compromised by taking a long draught of stout for he had found the carving hot 
work. Gabriel watched his wife, who did not join in the conversation. It was 
that of an old song of Aunt Julia’s--_Arrayed for the Bridal_. As the waters 
of baptism cleanse the soul with the body, so do the fires of punishment 
torture the spirit with the flesh. They seemed to him a band of tramps, huddled 
together along the riverbanks, their old coats covered with dust and soot, 
stupefied by the panorama of sunset and waiting for the first chill of night 
bid them arise, shake themselves and begone. They must direct their flocks. 
Farley and Jimmy were the heaviest losers. No one knew very well what the talk 
was about. He turned his eyes to the grey gleaming river, winding along towards 
Dublin. It was a mean thing to do, to shoulder him into the square ditch, they 
were saying. They were quenched: and the cold darkness filled chaos. She 
mounted the stairs behind the porter, her head bowed in the ascent, her frail 
shoulders curved as with a burden, her skirt girt tightly about her. 

It was a bright Sunday morning of early summer, promising heat, but with a 
fresh breeze blowing. I'm old enough to be his grandfather. 

Brother Michael repeated: 

--You'll get your walking papers. Everyone gave him advice and said it was a 
great pity and urged him to be very careful of his throat in the night air. 
Then he imitated Farrington, saying, _“And here was my nabs, as cool as you 
please,”_ while Farrington looked at the company out of his heavy dirty eyes, 
smiling and at times drawing forth stray drops of liquor from his moustache 
with the aid of his lower lip. All the fellows would be at the mass, dressed in 
black, all with sad faces. Even that night as he stumbled homewards along 
Jones's Road he had felt that some power was divesting him of that sudden-woven 
anger as easily as a fruit is divested of its soft ripe peel. In a whisper Mr 
Cunningham drew Mr Kernan’s attention to Mr Harford, the moneylender, who sat 
some distance off, and to Mr Fanning, the registration agent and mayor maker of 
the city, who was sitting immediately under the pulpit beside one of the newly 
elected councillors of the ward. A maid in a white cap and apron was watering a 
box of plants on a sill which shone like a slab of limestone in the warm glare. 
A soft whispering noise floated in vaporous cloudlets out of the box. Tea was 
nearly over and only the last of the second watered tea remained in the bottoms 
of the small glass jars and jampots which did service for teacups. Discarded 
crusts and lumps of sugared bread, turned brown by the tea which had been 
poured over them, lay scattered on the table. Little wells of tea lay here and 
there on the board, and a knife with a broken ivory handle was stuck through 
the pith of a ravaged turnover. Of course she was in a bad humour and gave him 
short answers. But what else could she do? She appealed to the second tenor who 
said he thought she had not been well treated. ” 

She had worked herself into a passion and would have continued in defence of 
her sister for it was a sore subject with her but Mary Jane, seeing that all 
the dancers had come back, intervened pacifically: 

“Now, Aunt Kate, you’re giving scandal to Mr Browne who is of the other 
persuasion. “No bones broken. What? Can you walk?” 

The young man in the cycling-suit took the man by the other arm and the crowd 
divided. 

--I didn't think he had that much in him, said Mr Casey. 

--O well then, said the rector, Father Dolan did not understand. But I am 
curious to know are you trying to make a convert of me or a pervert of 
yourself? 

He turned towards his friend's face and saw there a raw smile which some force 
of will strove to make finely significant. ” 

Lenehan laughed again, noiselessly. 

“O, don’t let that trouble you, Jack,” said Mr Henchy. That was what he 
had been in prison for and he remembered that one night Sergeant O'Neill had 
come to the house and had stood in the hall, talking in a low voice with his 
father and chewing nervously at the chinstrap of his cap. And that night Mr 
Casey had not gone to Dublin by train but a car had come to the door and he had 
heard his father say something about the Cabinteely road. 

--It's a stinking mean thing, that's what it is, said Fleming in the corridor 
as the classes were passing out in file to the refectory, to pandy a fellow for 
what is not his fault. It is not the first time that we have been the 
recipients--or perhaps, I had better say, the victims--of the hospitality of 
certain good ladies. And how cold and slimy the water had been! And a fellow 
had once seen a big rat jump plop into the scum. And every single fellow had a 
different way of walking. Perhaps they could be happy together. He was a poet 
himself. Then a short laugh broke from his lips as he thought of that solitary 
farmhand in the kitchen gardens behind their house whom they had nicknamed the 
man with the hat. There must be some left. Gabriel began to carve second 
helpings as soon as he had finished the first round without serving himself. 

“Yes, Lily,” he answered, “and I think we’re in for a night of it. 

He wished the details of the incident to remain vague. By the time they had 
crossed the quadrangle his restlessness had risen to fever. 

Every part of his day, divided by what he regarded now as the duties of his 
station in life, circled about its own centre of spiritual energy. 

--Well, I must go now, said Stephen, who cared little for such points of 
honour. “It’s Bartell D’Arcy singing and he wouldn’t sing all the 
night. You ask Hogan, my boy. Leave me to go mine. 

--Dedalus, said MacCann crisply, I believe you're a good fellow but you have 
yet to learn the dignity of altruism and the responsibility of the human 
individual. We want to hear about that. God loves with a divine love every 
human soul, and every human soul lives in that love. 

Mr Casey raised his clenched fist and brought it down on the table with a 
crash. His life seemed to have drawn near to eternity; every thought, word, and 
deed, every instance of consciousness could be made to revibrate radiantly in 
heaven; and at times his sense of such immediate repercussion was so lively 
that he seemed to feel his soul in devotion pressing like fingers the keyboard 
of a great cash register and to see the amount of his purchase start forth 
immediately in heaven, not as a number but as a frail column of incense or as a 
slender flower. A cry sprang to his lips, a prayer to be let off. Ten thousand 
souls won for God in a single month! That is a true conqueror, true to the 
motto of our order: AD MAJOREM DEI GLORIAM! A saint who has great power in 
heaven, remember: power to intercede for us in our grief; power to obtain 
whatever we pray for if it be for the good of our souls; power above all to 
obtain for us the grace to repent if we be in sin. He fancied to himself the 
English lecture and felt, even at that distance, restless and helpless. He 
waited still at the threshold as at the entrance to some dark cave. Mr Bell, 
the second tenor, was a fair-haired little man who competed every year for 
prizes at the Feis Ceoil. He had failed in business in a licensed house in the 
city because his financial condition had constrained him to tie himself to 
second-class distillers and brewers. Then he turned into Dame Street. The 
cabbage began to deposit a cold white grease on his plate. Angry with himself 
he tried to hide his face from their eyes by gazing down sideways into the 
shallow swirling water under the bridge but he still saw a reflection therein 
of their top-heavy silk hats and humble tape-like collars and loosely-hanging 
clerical clothes. 

--Brother Hickey. His mind, in the vesture of a doubting monk, stood often in 
shadow under the windows of that age, to hear the grave and mocking music of 
the lutenists or the frank laughter of waist-coateers until a laugh too low, a 
phrase, tarnished by time, of chambering and false honour stung his monkish 
pride and drove him on from his lurking-place. His eyes, which were of bluish 
slate-colour, relieved his unhealthy pallor and shone out plainly above the 
vivid orange tie he wore. He replied that he had spent the day with Corley. The 
shop was very quiet. That was called charcoal: and it had burned quietly as the 
fellow had swung it gently and had given off a weak sour smell. Mary Jane, who 
was then a little girl in short clothes, was now the main prop of the 
household, for she had the organ in Haddington Road. Mr Browne begged of them 
to sit down and eat their suppers and so did Gabriel but they said they were 
time enough so that, at last, Freddy Malins stood up and, capturing Aunt Kate, 
plumped her down on her chair amid general laughter. All I can say is I never 
heard her sing half so well as long as I am coming here. And he remembered that 
Newman had heard this note also in the broken lines of Virgil, GIVING 
UTTERANCE, LIKE THE VOICE OF NATURE HERSELF, TO THAT PAIN AND WEARINESS YET 
HOPE OF BETTER THINGS WHICH HAS BEEN THE EXPERIENCE OF HER CHILDREN IN EVERY 
TIME. Besides they were dreadfully afraid that Freddy Malins might turn up 
screwed. 

Rapid motion through space elates one; so does notoriety; so does the 
possession of money. ‘Wisha! wisha,’ says I. ‘A pound of chops,’ says 
he, ‘coming into the Mansion House. ’ ‘Wisha!’ says I, ‘what kind of 
people is going at all now?’” 

At this point there was a knock at the door, and a boy put in his head. ” 

“Why so?” 

“He asked me who the nominators were; and I told him. ” 

“And when we are thirsty we are also quarrelsome,” added Mr Browne. He 
ordered the same again. Besides Gleeson won't flog him hard. They would not 
wish for worlds that any of Mary Jane’s pupils should see him under the 
influence; and when he was like that it was sometimes very hard to manage him. 
He remembered well her eyes, the touch of her hand and his delirium. Faces were 
there; eyes: they waited and watched. 

--We knew perfectly well of course that though it was bound to come to the 
light he would find considerable difficulty in endeavouring to try to induce 
himself to try to endeavour to ascertain the spiritual plenipotentiary and so 
we knew of course perfectly well-- 

Murmuring faces waited and watched; murmurous voices filled the dark shell of 
the cave. Pride after satisfaction uplifted him like long slow waves. The end 
he had been born to serve yet did not see had led him to escape by an unseen 
path and now it beckoned to him once more and a new adventure was about to be 
opened to him. He saw her approach him in a lull of the talk and beg him to 
sing one of his curious songs. He had sailed through the Straits of Magellan 
and he told her stories of the terrible Patagonians. On the staircase he paused 
and gazing absently at Dixon repeated: 

--Pawn to king's bloody fourth. He was extremely nervous and extremely jealous 
of other tenors and he covered his nervous jealousy with an ebullient 
friendliness. He longed to ascend through the roof and fly away to another 
country where he would never hear again of his trouble, and yet a force pushed 
him downstairs step by step. He apologised to his guests for the disorder of 
the room, but at the same time looked at them a little proudly, with a 
veteran’s pride. 

--Admit! repeated Heron, striking him again with his cane across the calf of 
the leg. The face of an old priest was at the grating, averted from him, 
leaning upon a hand. At once from every part of his being unrest began to 
irradiate. 

Hm!. 

--Do you mean women? 

--I am not speaking of that, Cranly said in a colder tone. The arc of his 
social rise intersected the arc of his friend’s decline, but Mr Kernan’s 
decline was mitigated by the fact that certain of those friends who had known 
him at his highest point of success still esteemed him as a character. People, 
perhaps, were standing in the snow on the quay outside, gazing up at the 
lighted windows and listening to the waltz music. The air was pure there. Aunt 
Kate drew Gabriel aside hurriedly and whispered into his ear: 

“Slip down, Gabriel, like a good fellow and see if he’s all right, and 
don’t let him up if he’s screwed. Her hair, drawn low over the tops of her 
ears, was grey; and grey also, with darker shadows, was her large flaccid face. 

And all hearts were touched and turned to her voice, shining like a young star, 
shining clearer as the voice intoned the proparoxytone and more faintly as the 
cadence died. Evening had fallen. A rim of the young moon cleft the pale waste 
of skyline, the rim of a silver hoop embedded in grey sand; and the tide was 
flowing in fast to the land with a low whisper of her waves, islanding a few 
last figures in distant pools. Again a wave. His brain began to glow. I have 
not made or accepted its words. Here we are gathered together for a brief 
moment from the bustle and rush of our everyday routine. We are met here as 
friends, in the spirit of good-fellowship, as colleagues, also to a certain 
extent, in the true spirit of _camaraderie_, and as the guests of--what shall I 
call them?--the Three Graces of the Dublin musical world. And inquisitive! AND 
WHAT PART DOES STEPHEN TAKE, MR DEDALUS? AND WILL STEPHEN NOT SING, MR DEDALUS? 
Your governor was staring at her through that eyeglass of his for all he was 
worth so that I think the old man has found you out too. Do you know that? 

--Are you? asked Stephen. Then she said in an outburst of tears: 

“O, I am thinking about that song, _The Lass of Aughrim_. They had cried to 
him from the car, waving their hands: 

--Goodbye, Stephen, goodbye! 

--Goodbye, Stephen, goodbye! 

He was caught in the whirl of a scrimmage and, fearful of the flashing eyes and 
muddy boots, bent down to look through the legs. A little boy came running down 
the stairs. He felt how useless it was to struggle against fortune, this being 
the burden of wisdom which the ages had bequeathed to him. The light was 
lowered quietly. He had been a canvasser for Wilkins, the Conservative, but 
when the Conservatives had withdrawn their man and, choosing the lesser of two 
evils, given their support to the Nationalist candidate, he had been engaged to 
work for Mr Tierney. It was his humour to have people know what an ordeal a 
concert was to him. Could his mind then not trust itself? Old phrases, sweet 
only with a disinterred sweetness like the figseeds Cranly rooted out of his 
gleaming teeth. . 
