. O, well now, we got a good breath of ozone round the Head today. Ay, bedad. 

He turned to Dante and said: 

--You didn't stir out at all, Mrs Riordan? 

Dante frowned and said shortly: 

--No. 

Mr Dedalus dropped his coat-tails and went over to the sideboard. He brought 
forth a great stone jar of whisky from the locker and filled the decanter 
slowly, bending now and then to see how much he had poured in. Then replacing 
the jar in the locker he poured a little of the whisky into two glasses, added 
a little water and came back with them to the fireplace. 

--A thimbleful, John, he said, just to whet your appetite. 

Mr Casey took the glass, drank, and placed it near him on the mantelpiece. Then 
he said: 

--Well, I can't help thinking of our friend Christopher manufacturing. . “The 
Celtic note. ”_ It was a pity his name was not more Irish-looking. Perhaps it 
would be better to insert his mother’s name before the surname: Thomas Malone 
Chandler, or better still: T. Malone Chandler. He would speak to Gallaher about 
it. 

He pursued his revery so ardently that he passed his street and had to turn 
back. As he came near Corless’s his former agitation began to overmaster him 
and he halted before the door in indecision. Finally he opened the door and 
entered. 

The light and noise of the bar held him at the doorways for a few moments. He 
looked about him, but his sight was confused by the shining of many red and 
green wine-glasses The bar seemed to him to be full of people and he felt that 
the people were observing him curiously. He glanced quickly to right and left 
(frowning slightly to make his errand appear serious), but when his sight 
cleared a little he saw that nobody had turned to look at him: and there, sure 
enough, was Ignatius Gallaher leaning with his back against the counter and his 
feet planted far apart. 

“Hallo, Tommy, old hero, here you are! What is it to be? What will you have? 
I’m taking whisky: better stuff than we get across the water. Soda? Lithia? 
No mineral? I’m the same. Spoils the flavour. . Is he a good preacher?” 

“Munno. . you know. When you told me that night in Harcourt Street those 
things about your private life, honest to God, Stevie, I was not able to eat my 
dinner. I was quite bad. I was awake a long time that night. Why did you tell 
me those things? 

--Thanks, said Stephen. You mean I am a monster. 

--No, said Davin. But I wish you had not told me. Is it what you told me the 
night we were standing outside Harcourt Street station? 

--Yes, Stephen said, smiling in spite of himself at Cranly's way of remembering 
thoughts in connexion with places. The night you spent half an hour wrangling 
with Doherty about the shortest way from Sallygap to Larras. 

--Pothead! Cranly said with calm contempt. What does he know about the way from 
Sallygap to Larras? Or what does he know about anything for that matter? And 
the big slobbering washing-pot head of him! 

He broke into a loud long laugh. 

--Well? Stephen said. Do you remember the rest? 

--What you said, is it? Cranly asked. Yes, I remember it. 

He uncovered the dish boldly and said: 

--Now then, who's for more turkey? 

Nobody answered. Dante said: 

--Nice language for any catholic to use! 

--Mrs Riordan, I appeal to you, said Mrs Dedalus, to let the matter drop now. 

Dante turned on her and said: 

--And am I to sit here and listen to the pastors of my church being flouted? 

--Nobody is saying a word against them, said Mr Dedalus, so long as they don't 
meddle in politics. 

--The bishops and priests of Ireland have spoken, said Dante, and they must be 
obeyed. 

--Let them leave politics alone, said Mr Casey, or the people may leave their 
church alone. 

--You hear? said Dante, turning to Mrs Dedalus. 

--Mr Casey! Simon! said Mrs Dedalus, let it end now. 

--Too bad! Too bad! said uncle Charles. But a man's country comes first. 
Ireland first, Stevie. You can be a poet or a mystic after. 

--Do you know what Ireland is? asked Stephen with cold violence. Ireland is the 
old sow that eats her farrow. 

Davin rose from his box and went towards the players, shaking his head sadly. 
But in a moment his sadness left him and he was hotly disputing with Cranly and 
the two players who had finished their game. A match of four was arranged, 
Cranly insisting, however, that his ball should be used. He let it rebound 
twice or thrice to his hand and struck it strongly and swiftly towards the base 
of the alley, exclaiming in answer to its thud: 

--Your soul! 

Stephen stood with Lynch till the score began to rise. Then he plucked him by 
the sleeve to come away. Lynch obeyed, saying: 

--Let us eke go, as Cranly has it. 

Stephen smiled at this side-thrust. 

They passed back through the garden and out through the hall where the 
doddering porter was pinning up a hall notice in the frame. At the foot of the 
steps they halted and Stephen took a packet of cigarettes from his pocket and 
offered it to his companion. Lynch took the last one that remained, saying 
simply: 

--Proceed! 

--Aquinas, said Stephen, says that is beautiful the apprehension of which 
pleases. 

Lynch nodded. 

--I remember that, he said, PULCRA SUNT QUAE VISA PLACENT. 

--He uses the word VISA, said Stephen, to cover esthetic apprehensions of all 
kinds, whether through sight or hearing or through any other avenue of 
apprehension. This word, though it is vague, is clear enough to keep away good 
and evil which excite desire and loathing. It means certainly a stasis and not 
a kinesis. How about the true? It produces also a stasis of the mind. You would 
not write your name in pencil across the hypotenuse of a right-angled triangle. 

--No, said Lynch, give me the hypotenuse of the Venus of Praxiteles. 

--Static therefore, said Stephen. Plato, I believe, said that beauty is the 
splendour of truth. I don't think that it has a meaning, but the true and the 
beautiful are akin. Truth is beheld by the intellect which is appeased by the 
most satisfying relations of the intelligible; beauty is beheld by the 
imagination which is appeased by the most satisfying relations of the sensible. 
The first step in the direction of truth is to understand the frame and scope 
of the intellect itself, to comprehend the act itself of intellection. 
Aristotle's entire system of philosophy rests upon his book of psychology and 
that, I think, rests on his statement that the same attribute cannot at the 
same time and in the same connexion belong to and not belong to the same 
subject. The first step in the direction of beauty is to understand the frame 
and scope of the imagination, to comprehend the act itself of esthetic 
apprehension. Is that clear? 

--But what is beauty? asked Lynch impatiently. Out with another definition. 
Something we see and like! Is that the best you and Aquinas can do? 

--Let us take woman, said Stephen. 

--Let us take her! said Lynch fervently. 

--The Greek, the Turk, the Chinese, the Copt, the Hottentot, said Stephen, all 
admire a different type of female beauty. That seems to be a maze out of which 
we cannot escape. I see, however, two ways out. One is this hypothesis: that 
every physical quality admired by men in women is in direct connexion with the 
manifold functions of women for the propagation of the species. It may be so. 
The world, it seems, is drearier than even you, Lynch, imagined. For my 
esthetic. It leads you out of the maze into a new gaudy lecture-room where 
MacCann, with one hand on THE ORIGIN OF SPECIES and the other hand on the new 
testament, tells you that you admired the great flanks of Venus because you 
felt that she would bear you burly offspring and admired her great breasts 
because you felt that she would give good milk to her children and yours. 

--Then MacCann is a sulphur-yellow liar, said Lynch energetically. 

--There remains another way out, said Stephen, laughing. 

--To wit? said Lynch. 

--This hypothesis, Stephen began. 

A long dray laden with old iron came round the corner of Sir Patrick Dun's 
hospital covering the end of Stephen's speech with the harsh roar of jangled 
and rattling metal. Lynch closed his ears and gave out oath after oath till the 
dray had passed. Then he turned on his heel rudely. Stephen turned also and 
waited for a few moments till his companion's ill-humour had had its vent. 

--This hypothesis, Stephen repeated, is the other way out: that, though the 
same object may not seem beautiful to all people, all people who admire a 
beautiful object find in it certain relations which satisfy and coincide with 
the stages themselves of all esthetic apprehension. These relations of the 
sensible, visible to you through one form and to me through another, must be 
therefore the necessary qualities of beauty. Now, we can return to our old 
friend saint Thomas for another pennyworth of wisdom. 

Lynch laughed. His mind emptied of theory and courage, lapsed back into a 
listless peace. 

He heard the students talking among themselves. They spoke of two friends who 
had passed the final medical examination, of the chances of getting places on 
ocean liners, of poor and rich practices. 

--That's all a bubble. An Irish country practice is better. 

--Hynes was two years in Liverpool and he says the same. A frightful hole he 
said it was. Nothing but midwifery cases. 

--Do you mean to say it is better to have a job here in the country than in a 
rich city like that? I know a fellow. . . . . out-and-out ruffian, not one of 
them ever preached _ex cathedra_ a word of false doctrine. Now isn’t that an 
astonishing thing?” 

“That is,” said Mr Kernan. 

“Yes, because when the Pope speaks _ex cathedra_,” Mr Fogarty explained, 
“he is infallible. ” 

“Yes,” said Mr Cunningham. “I was married last May twelve months. ” 

“I hope it’s not too late in the day to offer my best wishes,” said 
Ignatius Gallaher. “I didn’t know your address or I’d have done so at the 
time. ” 

He extended his hand, which Little Chandler took. 

“Well, Tommy,” he said, “I wish you and yours every joy in life, old 
chap, and tons of money, and may you never die till I shoot you. And that’s 
the wish of a sincere friend, an old friend. You know that?” 

“I know that,” said Little Chandler. “I won’t be bringing him in his 
cup of beef-tea any more, nor you, ma’am, sending him his snuff. Ah, poor 
James!” 

She stopped, as if she were communing with the past and then said shrewdly: 

“Mind you, I noticed there was something queer coming over him latterly. 
Whenever I’d bring in his soup to him there I’d find him with his breviary 
fallen to the floor, lying back in the chair and his mouth open. ” 

She laid a finger against her nose and frowned: then she continued: 

“But still and all he kept on saying that before the summer was over he’d 
go out for a drive one fine day just to see the old house again where we were 
all born down in Irishtown and take me and Nannie with him. If we could only 
get one of them new-fangled carriages that makes no noise that Father 
O’Rourke told him about, them with the rheumatic wheels, for the day 
cheap--he said, at Johnny Rush’s over the way there and drive out the three 
of us together of a Sunday evening. He had his mind set on that. . . . . Look 
out! 

--Oh, Cripes, I'm drownded! 

--One! Two! Three and away! 

--The next! The next! 

--One!. . . . 

The door was burst open and a young woman ran in, panting. 

“What is it? What is it?” she cried. 

“From the _Black Eagle_,” said the boy, walking in sideways and depositing 
a basket on the floor with a noise of shaken bottles. 

The old man helped the boy to transfer the bottles from the basket to the table 
and counted the full tally. After the transfer the boy put his basket on his 
arm and asked: 

“Any bottles?” 

“What bottles?” said the old man. 

“Won’t you let us drink them first?” said Mr Henchy. 

“I was told to ask for the bottles. ” 

“Come back tomorrow,” said the old man. 

“Here, boy!” said Mr Henchy, “will you run over to O’Farrell’s and 
ask him to lend us a corkscrew--for Mr Henchy, say. Tell him we won’t keep it 
a minute. Leave the basket there. ” 

The boy went out and Mr Henchy began to rub his hands cheerfully, saying: 

“Ah, well, he’s not so bad after all. He’s as good as his word, anyhow. 
” 

“There’s no tumblers,” said the old man. 

“O, don’t let that trouble you, Jack,” said Mr Henchy. “Many’s the 
good man before now drank out of the bottle. ” 

“Anyway, it’s better than nothing,” said Mr O’Connor. 

“He’s not a bad sort,” said Mr Henchy, “only Fanning has such a loan of 
him. He means well, you know, in his own tinpot way. ” 

The boy came back with the corkscrew. The old man opened three bottles and was 
handing back the corkscrew when Mr Henchy said to the boy: 

“Would you like a drink, boy?” 

“If you please, sir,” said the boy. 

The old man opened another bottle grudgingly, and handed it to the boy. 

“What age are you?” he asked. 

While she spoke she turned a silver bracelet round and round her wrist. She 
could not go, she said, because there would be a retreat that week in her 
convent. Her brother and two other boys were fighting for their caps and I was 
alone at the railings. She held one of the spikes, bowing her head towards me. 
The light from the lamp opposite our door caught the white curve of her neck, 
lit up her hair that rested there and, falling, lit up the hand upon the 
railing. It fell over one side of her dress and caught the white border of a 
petticoat, just visible as she stood at ease. 

“It’s well for you,” she said. 

Kathleen followed her mother meekly. To the sellers in the market, to the 
barmen and barmaids, to the beggars who importuned him for a lob Mr Dedalus 
told the same tale--that he was an old Corkonian, that he had been trying for 
thirty years to get rid of his Cork accent up in Dublin and that Peter 
Pickackafax beside him was his eldest son but that he was only a Dublin 
jackeen. 

They had set out early in the morning from Newcombe's coffee-house, where Mr 
Dedalus's cup had rattled noisily against its saucer, and Stephen had tried to 
cover that shameful sign of his father's drinking bout of the night before by 
moving his chair and coughing. One humiliation had succeeded another--the false 
smiles of the market sellers, the curvetings and oglings of the barmaids with 
whom his father flirted, the compliments and encouraging words of his father's 
friends. They had told him that he had a great look of his grandfather and Mr 
Dedalus had agreed that he was an ugly likeness. They had unearthed traces of a 
Cork accent in his speech and made him admit that the Lee was a much finer 
river than the Liffey. One of them, in order to put his Latin to the proof, had 
made him translate short passages from Dilectus and asked him whether it was 
correct to say: TEMPORA MUTANTUR NOS ET MUTAMUR IN ILLIS or TEMPORA MUTANTUR ET 
NOS MUTAMUR IN ILLIS. Another, a brisk old man, whom Mr Dedalus called Johnny 
Cashman, had covered him with confusion by asking him to say which were 
prettier, the Dublin girls or the Cork girls. 

--He's not that way built, said Mr Dedalus. Leave him alone. He was happy and 
free; but he would not be anyway proud with Father Dolan. He would be very 
quiet and obedient: and he wished that he could do something kind for him to 
show him that he was not proud. 

The air was soft and grey and mild and evening was coming. There was the smell 
of evening in the air, the smell of the fields in the country where they digged 
up turnips to peel them and eat them when they went out for a walk to Major 
Barton's, the smell there was in the little wood beyond the pavilion where the 
gallnuts were. 

The fellows were practising long shies and bowling lobs and slow twisters. In 
the soft grey silence he could hear the bump of the balls: and from here and 
from there through the quiet air the sound of the cricket bats: pick, pack, 
pock, puck: like drops of water in a fountain falling softly in the brimming 
bowl. 











Uncle Charles smoked such black twist that at last his nephew suggested to him 
to enjoy his morning smoke in a little outhouse at the end of the garden. 

--Very good, Simon. Will that do now? 

Stephen felt the tears wetting his eyes and murmured: 

--O yes sir, thanks. 

The rector held his hand across the side of the desk where the skull was and 
Stephen, placing his hand in it for a moment, felt a cool moist palm. 

--Good day now, said the rector, withdrawing his hand and bowing. 

Stephen stood up in his place to say the grace before meals: 



Bless us, O Lord, and these Thy gifts which through Thy bounty we are about to 
receive through Christ our Lord. Amen. 



All blessed themselves and Mr Dedalus with a sigh of pleasure lifted from the 
dish the heavy cover pearled around the edge with glistening drops. 

Stephen looked at the plump turkey which had lain, trussed and skewered, on the 
kitchen table. He knew that his father had paid a guinea for it in Dunn's of 
D'Olier Street and that the man had prodded it often at the breastbone to show 
how good it was: and he remembered the man's voice when he had said: 

--Take that one, sir. That's the real Ally Daly. 

Why did Mr Barrett in Clongowes call his pandybat a turkey? But Clongowes was 
far away: and the warm heavy smell of turkey and ham and celery rose from the 
plates and dishes and the great fire was banked high and red in the grate and 
the green ivy and red holly made you feel so happy and when dinner was ended 
the big plum pudding would be carried in, studded with peeled almonds and 
sprigs of holly, with bluish fire running around it and a little green flag 
flying from the top. 

It was his first Christmas dinner and he thought of his little brothers and 
sisters who were waiting in the nursery, as he had often waited, till the 
pudding came. The deep low collar and the Eton jacket made him feel queer and 
oldish: and that morning when his mother had brought him down to the parlour, 
dressed for mass, his father had cried. That was because he was thinking of his 
own father. And uncle Charles had said so too. 

--How are you off, sir? 

--Right as the mail, Simon. 

--You, John? 

--I'm all right. Byron the greatest poet! He's only a poet for uneducated 
people. 

--He must be a fine poet! said Boland. 

--You may keep your mouth shut, said Stephen, turning on him boldly. All you 
know about poetry is what you wrote up on the slates in the yard and were going 
to be sent to the loft for. 

Boland, in fact, was said to have written on the slates in the yard a couplet 
about a classmate of his who often rode home from the college on a pony: 



As Tyson was riding into Jerusalem He fell and hurt his Alec Kafoozelum. 



This thrust put the two lieutenants to silence but Heron went on: 

--In any case Byron was a heretic and immoral too. 

--I don't care what he was, cried Stephen hotly. 

--You don't care whether he was a heretic or not? said Nash. 

--What do you know about it? shouted Stephen. You never read a line of anything 
in your life except a trans, or Boland either. 

--I know that Byron was a bad man, said Boland. 

--Here, catch hold of this heretic, Heron called out. In a moment Stephen was a 
prisoner. 

--Tate made you buck up the other day, Heron went on, about the heresy in your 
essay. 

--I'll tell him tomorrow, said Boland. 

--Will you? said Stephen. You'd be afraid to open your lips. 

--Afraid? 

--Ay. Afraid of your life. 

--Behave yourself! cried Heron, cutting at Stephen's legs with his cane. 

It was the signal for their onset. Nash pinioned his arms behind while Boland 
seized a long cabbage stump which was lying in the gutter. Struggling and 
kicking under the cuts of the cane and the blows of the knotty stump Stephen 
was borne back against a barbed wire fence. 

--Admit that Byron was no good. 

--No. 

--Admit. 

--No. No. You would not. And now, though you were to flood all hell with your 
tears if you could still weep, all that sea of repentance would not gain for 
you what a single tear of true repentance shed during your mortal life would 
have gained for you. You implore now a moment of earthly life wherein to 
repent: in vain. That time is gone: gone for ever. 

--Such is the threefold sting of conscience, the viper which gnaws the very 
heart's core of the wretches in hell, so that filled with hellish fury they 
curse themselves for their folly and curse the evil companions who have brought 
them to such ruin and curse the devils who tempted them in life and now mock 
them in eternity and even revile and curse the Supreme Being Whose goodness and 
patience they scorned and slighted but Whose justice and power they cannot 
evade. 

--The next spiritual pain to which the damned are subjected is the pain of 
extension. Man, in this earthly life, though he be capable of many evils, is 
not capable of them all at once, inasmuch as one evil corrects and counteracts 
another just as one poison frequently corrects another. In hell, on the 
contrary, one torment, instead of counteracting another, lends it still greater 
force: and, moreover, as the internal faculties are more perfect than the 
external senses, so are they more capable of suffering. Just as every sense is 
afflicted with a fitting torment, so is every spiritual faculty; the fancy with 
horrible images, the sensitive faculty with alternate longing and rage, the 
mind and understanding with an interior darkness more terrible even than the 
exterior darkness which reigns in that dreadful prison. The malice, impotent 
though it be, which possesses these demon souls is an evil of boundless 
extension, of limitless duration, a frightful state of wickedness which we can 
scarcely realize unless we bear in mind the enormity of sin and the hatred God 
bears to it. 

--Opposed to this pain of extension and yet coexistent with it we have the pain 
of intensity. Hell is the centre of evils and, as you know, things are more 
intense at their centres than at their remotest points. There are no contraries 
or admixtures of any kind to temper or soften in the least the pains of hell. 
Nay, things which are good in themselves become evil in hell. Company, 
elsewhere a source of comfort to the afflicted, will be there a continual 
torment: knowledge, so much longed for as the chief good of the intellect, will 
there be hated worse than ignorance: light, so much coveted by all creatures 
from the lord of creation down to the humblest plant in the forest, will be 
loathed intensely. In this life our sorrows are either not very long or not 
very great because nature either overcomes them by habits or puts an end to 
them by sinking under their weight. But in hell the torments cannot be overcome 
by habit, for while they are of terrible intensity they are at the same time of 
continual variety, each pain, so to speak, taking fire from another and 
re-endowing that which has enkindled it with a still fiercer flame. Nor can 
nature escape from these intense and various tortures by succumbing to them for 
the soul is sustained and maintained in evil so that its suffering may be the 
greater. Boundless extension of torment, incredible intensity of suffering, 
unceasing variety of torture--this is what the divine majesty, so outraged by 
sinners, demands; this is what the holiness of heaven, slighted and set aside 
for the lustful and low pleasures of the corrupt flesh, requires; this is what 
the blood of the innocent Lamb of God, shed for the redemption of sinners, 
trampled upon by the vilest of the vile, insists upon. 

--Last and crowning torture of all the tortures of that awful place is the 
eternity of hell. Eternity! O, dread and dire word. Eternity! What mind of man 
can understand it? And remember, it is an eternity of pain. Even though the 
pains of hell were not so terrible as they are, yet they would become infinite, 
as they are destined to last for ever. But while they are everlasting they are 
at the same time, as you know, intolerably intense, unbearably extensive. To 
bear even the sting of an insect for all eternity would be a dreadful torment. 
What must it be, then, to bear the manifold tortures of hell for ever? For 
ever! For all eternity! Not for a year or for an age but for ever. Try to 
imagine the awful meaning of this. You have often seen the sand on the 
seashore. How fine are its tiny grains! And how many of those tiny little 
grains go to make up the small handful which a child grasps in its play. Now 
imagine a mountain of that sand, a million miles high, reaching from the earth 
to the farthest heavens, and a million miles broad, extending to remotest 
space, and a million miles in thickness; and imagine such an enormous mass of 
countless particles of sand multiplied as often as there are leaves in the 
forest, drops of water in the mighty ocean, feathers on birds, scales on fish, 
hairs on animals, atoms in the vast expanse of the air: and imagine that at the 
end of every million years a little bird came to that mountain and carried away 
in its beak a tiny grain of that sand. How many millions upon millions of 
centuries would pass before that bird had carried away even a square foot of 
that mountain, how many eons upon eons of ages before it had carried away all? 
Yet at the end of that immense stretch of time not even one instant of eternity 
could be said to have ended. At the end of all those billions and trillions of 
years eternity would have scarcely begun. And if that mountain rose again after 
it had been all carried away, and if the bird came again and carried it all 
away again grain by grain, and if it so rose and sank as many times as there 
are stars in the sky, atoms in the air, drops of water in the sea, leaves on 
the trees, feathers upon birds, scales upon fish, hairs upon animals, at the 
end of all those innumerable risings and sinkings of that immeasurably vast 
mountain not one single instant of eternity could be said to have ended; even 
then, at the end of such a period, after that eon of time the mere thought of 
which makes our very brain reel dizzily, eternity would scarcely have begun. 

--A holy saint (one of our own fathers I believe it was) was once vouchsafed a 
vision of hell. It seemed to him that he stood in the midst of a great hall, 
dark and silent save for the ticking of a great clock. The ticking went on 
unceasingly; and it seemed to this saint that the sound of the ticking was the 
ceaseless repetition of the words--ever, never; ever, never. Ever to be in 
hell, never to be in heaven; ever to be shut off from the presence of God, 
never to enjoy the beatific vision; ever to be eaten with flames, gnawed by 
vermin, goaded with burning spikes, never to be free from those pains; ever to 
have the conscience upbraid one, the memory enrage, the mind filled with 
darkness and despair, never to escape; ever to curse and revile the foul demons 
who gloat fiendishly over the misery of their dupes, never to behold the 
shining raiment of the blessed spirits; ever to cry out of the abyss of fire to 
God for an instant, a single instant, of respite from such awful agony, never 
to receive, even for an instant, God's pardon; ever to suffer, never to enjoy; 
ever to be damned, never to be saved; ever, never; ever, never. O, what a 
dreadful punishment! An eternity of endless agony, of endless bodily and 
spiritual torment, without one ray of hope, without one moment of cessation, of 
agony limitless in intensity, of torment infinitely varied, of torture that 
sustains eternally that which it eternally devours, of anguish that 
everlastingly preys upon the spirit while it racks the flesh, an eternity, 
every instant of which is itself an eternity of woe. Such is the terrible 
punishment decreed for those who die in mortal sin by an almighty and a just 
God. 

--Yes, a just God! Men, reasoning always as men, are astonished that God should 
mete out an everlasting and infinite punishment in the fires of hell for a 
single grievous sin. They reason thus because, blinded by the gross illusion of 
the flesh and the darkness of human understanding, they are unable to 
comprehend the hideous malice of mortal sin. They reason thus because they are 
unable to comprehend that even venial sin is of such a foul and hideous nature 
that even if the omnipotent Creator could end all the evil and misery in the 
world, the wars, the diseases, the robberies, the crimes, the deaths, the 
murders, on condition that he allowed a single venial sin to pass unpunished, a 
single venial sin, a lie, an angry look, a moment of wilful sloth, He, the 
great omnipotent God could not do so because sin, be it in thought or deed, is 
a transgression of His law and God would not be God if He did not punish the 
transgressor. 

--A sin, an instant of rebellious pride of the intellect, made Lucifer and a 
third part of the cohort of angels fall from their glory. A sin, an instant of 
folly and weakness, drove Adam and Eve out of Eden and brought death and 
suffering into the world. To retrieve the consequences of that sin the Only 
Begotten Son of God came down to earth, lived and suffered and died a most 
painful death, hanging for three hours on the cross. 

--O, my dear little brethren in Christ Jesus, will we then offend that good 
Redeemer and provoke His anger? Will we trample again upon that torn and 
mangled corpse? Will we spit upon that face so full of sorrow and love? Will we 
too, like the cruel jews and the brutal soldiers, mock that gentle and 
compassionate Saviour Who trod alone for our sake the awful wine-press of 
sorrow? Every word of sin is a wound in His tender side. Every sinful act is a 
thorn piercing His head. Every impure thought, deliberately yielded to, is a 
keen lance transfixing that sacred and loving heart. No, no. 

“You looked tired,” he said. 

“I am a little,” she answered. 

“You don’t feel ill or weak?” 

“No, tired: that’s all. ” 

She went on to the window and stood there, looking out. A figure came up the 
staircase from the hall. He wore the white cloak of a marshal; his face was 
pale and strange; he held his hand pressed to his side. He looked out of 
strange eyes at the old servants. They looked at him and saw their master's 
face and cloak and knew that he had received his death-wound. But only the dark 
was where they looked: only dark silent air. Their master had received his 
death-wound on the battlefield of Prague far away over the sea. He was standing 
on the field; his hand was pressed to his side; his face was pale and strange 
and he wore the white cloak of a marshal. 

O how cold and strange it was to think of that! All the dark was cold and 
strange. There were pale strange faces there, great eyes like carriage-lamps. 
They were the ghosts of murderers, the figures of marshals who had received 
their death-wound on battlefields far away over the sea. What did they wish to 
say that their faces were so strange? 



VISIT, WE BESEECH THEE, O LORD, THIS HABITATION AND DRIVE AWAY FROM IT ALL. . . 

He held a piece of fowl up on the prong of the carving fork. Nobody spoke. He 
said again: 

--I think there were more strangers down than last Christmas. 

He looked round at the others whose faces were bent towards their plates and, 
receiving no reply, waited for a moment and said bitterly: 

--Well, my Christmas dinner has been spoiled anyhow. 

--There could be neither luck nor grace, Dante said, in a house where there is 
no respect for the pastors of the church. 

Mr Dedalus threw his knife and fork noisily on his plate. 

--Respect! he said. Is it for Billy with the lip or for the tub of guts up in 
Armagh? Respect! 

--Princes of the church, said Mr Casey with slow scorn. 

--Lord Leitrim's coachman, yes, said Mr Dedalus. 

--They are the Lord's anointed, Dante said. They are an honour to their 
country. 

--Tub of guts, said Mr Dedalus coarsely. He has a handsome face, mind you, in 
repose. You should see that fellow lapping up his bacon and cabbage of a cold 
winter's day. O Johnny! 

He twisted his features into a grimace of heavy bestiality and made a lapping 
noise with his lips. 

--Really, Simon, you should not speak that way before Stephen. It's not right. 

--O, he'll remember all this when he grows up, said Dante hotly--the language 
he heard against God and religion and priests in his own home. 

--Let him remember too, cried Mr Casey to her from across the table, the 
language with which the priests and the priests' pawns broke Parnell's heart 
and hounded him into his grave. Let him remember that too when he grows up. 

--Sons of bitches! cried Mr Dedalus. When he was down they turned on him to 
betray him and rend him like rats in a sewer. Low-lived dogs! And they look it! 
By Christ, they look it! 

--They behaved rightly, cried Dante. They obeyed their bishops and their 
priests. Honour to them! 

--Well, it is perfectly dreadful to say that not even for one day in the year, 
said Mrs Dedalus, can we be free from these dreadful disputes! 

Uncle Charles raised his hands mildly and said: 

--Come now, come now, come now! Can we not have our opinions whatever they are 
without this bad temper and this bad language? It is too bad surely. 

Mrs Dedalus spoke to Dante in a low voice but Dante said loudly: 

--I will not say nothing. I will defend my church and my religion when it is 
insulted and spit on by renegade catholics. 

Mr Casey pushed his plate rudely into the middle of the table and, resting his 
elbows before him, said in a hoarse voice to his host: 

--Tell me, did I tell you that story about a very famous spit? 

--You did not, John, said Mr Dedalus. 

--Why then, said Mr Casey, it is a most instructive story. It happened not long 
ago in the county Wicklow where we are now. 

He broke off and, turning towards Dante, said with quiet indignation: 

--And I may tell you, ma'am, that I, if you mean me, am no renegade catholic. I 
am a catholic as my father was and his father before him and his father before 
him again, when we gave up our lives rather than sell our faith. 

--The more shame to you now, Dante said, to speak as you do. 

--The story, John, said Mr Dedalus smiling. Let us have the story anyhow. 

--Catholic indeed! repeated Dante ironically. The blackest protestant in the 
land would not speak the language I have heard this evening. 

Mr Dedalus began to sway his head to and fro, crooning like a country singer. 

--I am no protestant, I tell you again, said Mr Casey, flushing. 

Mr Dedalus, still crooning and swaying his head, began to sing in a grunting 
nasal tone: 



O, come all you Roman catholics That never went to mass. 



He took up his knife and fork again in good humour and set to eating, saying to 
Mr Casey: 

--Let us have the story, John. And her thoughtfulness! If the night was anyway 
cold or wet or windy there was sure to be a little tumbler of punch ready for 
him. Perhaps they could be happy together. . . . . O, good evening, Stephen. 

He answered the greeting and saw a silly smile break over the face in the 
doorway. 

They turned to the left and walked on as before. When they had gone on so for 
some time Stephen said: 

--Cranly, I had an unpleasant quarrel this evening. 

--With your people? Cranly asked. 

--With my mother. 

--Were they married women, my child? 

He did not know. His sins trickled from his lips, one by one, trickled in 
shameful drops from his soul, festering and oozing like a sore, a squalid 
stream of vice. The last sins oozed forth, sluggish, filthy. There was no more 
to tell. 

He bent down to rake the fire. Mr Hynes took off his hat, shook it and then 
turned down the collar of his coat, displaying, as he did so, an ivy leaf in 
the lapel. 

“If this man was alive,” he said, pointing to the leaf, “we’d have no 
talk of an address of welcome. ” 

“That’s true,” said Mr O’Connor. 

“Musha, God be with them times!” said the old man. “There was some life 
in it then. ” 

The room was silent again. Stephen stood among them, afraid to speak, 
listening. A faint sickness of awe made him feel weak. How could they have done 
that? He thought of the dark silent sacristy. There were dark wooden presses 
there where the crimped surplices lay quietly folded. It was not the chapel but 
still you had to speak under your breath. It was a holy place. The boy that 
held the censer had swung it lifted by the middle chain to keep the coals 
lighting. That was called charcoal: and it had burned quietly as the fellow had 
swung it gently and had given off a weak sour smell. And then when all were 
vested he had stood holding out the boat to the rector and the rector had put a 
spoonful of incense in it and it had hissed on the red coals. 

The fellows were talking together in little groups here and there on the 
playground. 

At last Fleming said: 

--And we are all to be punished for what other fellows did? 

--I won't come back, see if I do, Cecil Thunder said. Perhaps they had stolen a 
monstrance to run away with and sell it somewhere. That must have been a 
terrible sin, to go in there quietly at night, to open the dark press and steal 
the flashing gold thing into which God was put on the altar in the middle of 
flowers and candles at benediction while the incense went up in clouds at both 
sides as the fellow swung the censer and Dominic Kelly sang the first part by 
himself in the choir. But God was not in it of course when they stole it. But 
still it was a strange and a great sin even to touch it. He thought of it with 
deep awe; a terrible and strange sin: it thrilled him to think of it in the 
silence when the pens scraped lightly. But to drink the altar wine out of the 
press and be found out by the smell was a sin too: but it was not terrible and 
strange. Lavender and cream and pink roses were beautiful to think of. Perhaps 
a wild rose might be like those colours and he remembered the song about the 
wild rose blossoms on the little green place. 

He sang that song. That was his song. 

O, the green wothe botheth. 

When you wet the bed first it is warm then it gets cold. His mother put on the 
oilsheet. That had the queer smell. 

His mother had a nicer smell than his father. She played on the piano the 
sailor's hornpipe for him to dance. He danced: 

Tralala lala, Tralala tralaladdy, Tralala lala, Tralala lala. 

Uncle Charles and Dante clapped. They were older than his father and mother but 
uncle Charles was older than Dante. His gaiety seemed to forsake him and, as he 
came by the railings of the Duke’s Lawn, he allowed his hand to run along 
them. The air which the harpist had played began to control his movements. His 
softly padded feet played the melody while his fingers swept a scale of 
variations idly along the railings after each group of notes. 

He walked listlessly round Stephen’s Green and then down Grafton Street. 
Though his eyes took note of many elements of the crowd through which he passed 
they did so morosely. He found trivial all that was meant to charm him and did 
not answer the glances which invited him to be bold. He knew that he would have 
to speak a great deal, to invent and to amuse, and his brain and throat were 
too dry for such a task. The problem of how he could pass the hours till he met 
Corley again troubled him a little. He could think of no way of passing them 
but to keep on walking. ” 

I knew that I was under observation so I continued eating as if the news had 
not interested me. My uncle explained to old Cotter. 

“The youngster and he were great friends. The old chap taught him a great 
deal, mind you; and they say he had a great wish for him. ” 

“God have mercy on his soul,” said my aunt piously. 

Old Cotter looked at me for a while. 

“The youngster and he were great friends. The old chap taught him a great 
deal, mind you; and they say he had a great wish for him. ” 

“God have mercy on his soul,” said my aunt piously. 

Old Cotter looked at me for a while. I felt that his little beady black eyes 
were examining me but I would not satisfy him by looking up from my plate. He 
returned to his pipe and finally spat rudely into the grate. 

“I wouldn’t like children of mine,” he said, “to have too much to say 
to a man like that. ” 

“How do you mean, Mr Cotter?” asked my aunt. 

“What I mean is,” said old Cotter, “it’s bad for children. My idea is: 
let a young lad run about and play with young lads of his own age and not be. . 
. . . But tell me something about yourself. Hogan told me you had. . . . . . . 
. Well, you better look sharp and get a copy of our correspondence in the 
Delacour case for Mr Alleyne. ” 

This address in the presence of the public, his run upstairs and the porter he 
had gulped down so hastily confused the man and, as he sat down at his desk to 
get what was required, he realised how hopeless was the task of finishing his 
copy of the contract before half past five. The dark damp night was coming and 
he longed to spend it in the bars, drinking with his friends amid the glare of 
gas and the clatter of glasses. He got out the Delacour correspondence and 
passed out of the office. He hoped Mr Alleyne would not discover that the last 
two letters were missing. 

The moist pungent perfume lay all the way up to Mr Alleyne’s room. Miss 
Delacour was a middle-aged woman of Jewish appearance. Mr Alleyne was said to 
be sweet on her or on her money. She came to the office often and stayed a long 
time when she came. She was sitting beside his desk now in an aroma of 
perfumes, smoothing the handle of her umbrella and nodding the great black 
feather in her hat. Mr Alleyne had swivelled his chair round to face her and 
thrown his right foot jauntily upon his left knee. The man put the 
correspondence on the desk and bowed respectfully but neither Mr Alleyne nor 
Miss Delacour took any notice of his bow. Mr Alleyne tapped a finger on the 
correspondence and then flicked it towards him as if to say: _“That’s all 
right: you can go. ”_ 

The man returned to the lower office and sat down again at his desk. He stared 
intently at the incomplete phrase: _In no case shall the said Bernard Bodley 
be_. . you know. Is it Tricky Dicky Tierney?” 

“By God! perhaps you’re right, Joe,” said Mr O’Connor. “Anyway, I 
wish he’d turn up with the spondulics. ” 

The three men fell silent. Stephen stood among them, afraid to speak, 
listening. A faint sickness of awe made him feel weak. How could they have done 
that? He thought of the dark silent sacristy. There were dark wooden presses 
there where the crimped surplices lay quietly folded. It was not the chapel but 
still you had to speak under your breath. It was a holy place. He remembered 
the summer evening he had been there to be dressed as boatbearer, the evening 
of the Procession to the little altar in the wood. A strange and holy place. 
The boy that held the censer had swung it lifted by the middle chain to keep 
the coals lighting. That was called charcoal: and it had burned quietly as the 
fellow had swung it gently and had given off a weak sour smell. And then when 
all were vested he had stood holding out the boat to the rector and the rector 
had put a spoonful of incense in it and it had hissed on the red coals. 

The fellows were talking together in little groups here and there on the 
playground. The fellows seemed to him to have grown smaller: that was because a 
sprinter had knocked him down the day before, a fellow out of second of 
grammar. He had been thrown by the fellow's machine lightly on the cinder path 
and his spectacles had been broken in three pieces and some of the grit of the 
cinders had gone into his mouth. 

That was why the fellows seemed to him smaller and farther away and the 
goalposts so thin and far and the soft grey sky so high up. But there was no 
play on the football grounds for cricket was coming: and some said that Barnes 
would be prof and some said it would be Flowers. And all over the playgrounds 
they were playing rounders and bowling twisters and lobs. And from here and 
from there came the sounds of the cricket bats through the soft grey air. A 
long thin cane would have a high whistling sound and he wondered what was that 
pain like. It made him shivery to think of it and cold: and what Athy said too. 
But what was there to laugh at in it? It made him shivery: but that was because 
you always felt like a shiver when you let down your trousers. 

The prefect cried: 

--Quick march! Hayfoot! Strawfoot! 

They went together down the staircase and along the corridor and past the bath. 
As he passed the door he remembered with a vague fear the warm turf-coloured 
bogwater, the warm moist air, the noise of plunges, the smell of the towels, 
like medicine. 

Brother Michael was standing at the door of the infirmary and from the door of 
the dark cabinet on his right came a smell like medicine. That came from the 
bottles on the shelves. He had bought them in his bachelor days and many an 
evening, as he sat in the little room off the hall, he had been tempted to take 
one down from the bookshelf and read out something to his wife. But shyness had 
always held him back; and so the books had remained on their shelves. At times 
he repeated lines to himself and this consoled him. 

When his hour had struck he stood up and took leave of his desk and of his 
fellow-clerks punctiliously. He emerged from under the feudal arch of the 
King’s Inns, a neat modest figure, and walked swiftly down Henrietta Street. 
The golden sunset was waning and the air had grown sharp. A horde of grimy 
children populated the street. They stood or ran in the roadway or crawled up 
the steps before the gaping doors or squatted like mice upon the thresholds. 
Little Chandler gave them no thought. He picked his way deftly through all that 
minute vermin-like life and under the shadow of the gaunt spectral mansions in 
which the old nobility of Dublin had roystered. No memory of the past touched 
him, for his mind was full of a present joy. 

He had never been in Corless’s but he knew the value of the name. He knew 
that people went there after the theatre to eat oysters and drink liqueurs; and 
he had heard that the waiters there spoke French and German. Walking swiftly by 
at night he had seen cabs drawn up before the door and richly dressed ladies, 
escorted by cavaliers, alight and enter quickly. They wore noisy dresses and 
many wraps. Their faces were powdered and they caught up their dresses, when 
they touched earth, like alarmed Atalantas. He had always passed without 
turning his head to look. It was his habit to walk swiftly in the street even 
by day and whenever he found himself in the city late at night he hurried on 
his way apprehensively and excitedly. Sometimes, however, he courted the causes 
of his fear. He chose the darkest and narrowest streets and, as he walked 
boldly forward, the silence that was spread about his footsteps troubled him, 
the wandering silent figures troubled him; and at times a sound of low fugitive 
laughter made him tremble like a leaf. 

He turned to the right towards Capel Street. Then he turned into Dame Street. 
The street was busy with unusual traffic, loud with the horns of motorists and 
the gongs of impatient tram-drivers. Near the Bank Ségouin drew up and Jimmy 
and his friend alighted. A little knot of people collected on the footpath to 
pay homage to the snorting motor. The party was to dine together that evening 
in Ségouin’s hotel and, meanwhile, Jimmy and his friend, who was staying 
with him, were to go home to dress. The car steered out slowly for Grafton 
Street while the two young men pushed their way through the knot of gazers. 
They walked northward with a curious feeling of disappointment in the exercise, 
while the city hung its pale globes of light above them in a haze of summer 
evening. 

In Jimmy’s house this dinner had been pronounced an occasion. A certain pride 
mingled with his parents’ trepidation, a certain eagerness, also, to play 
fast and loose for the names of great foreign cities have at least this virtue. 
Jimmy, too, looked very well when he was dressed and, as he stood in the hall 
giving a last equation to the bows of his dress tie, his father may have felt 
even commercially satisfied at having secured for his son qualities often 
unpurchaseable. His father, therefore, was unusually friendly with Villona and 
his manner expressed a real respect for foreign accomplishments; but this 
subtlety of his host was probably lost upon the Hungarian, who was beginning to 
have a sharp desire for his dinner. 

The dinner was excellent, exquisite. Ségouin, Jimmy decided, had a very 
refined taste. The party was increased by a young Englishman named Routh whom 
Jimmy had seen with Ségouin at Cambridge. The young men supped in a snug room 
lit by electric candle-lamps. They talked volubly and with little reserve. 
Jimmy, whose imagination was kindling, conceived the lively youth of the 
Frenchmen twined elegantly upon the firm framework of the Englishman’s 
manner. A graceful image of his, he thought, and a just one. He admired the 
dexterity with which their host directed the conversation. The five young men 
had various tastes and their tongues had been loosened. Villona, with immense 
respect, began to discover to the mildly surprised Englishman the beauties of 
the English madrigal, deploring the loss of old instruments. Rivière, not 
wholly ingenuously, undertook to explain to Jimmy the triumph of the French 
mechanicians. The resonant voice of the Hungarian was about to prevail in 
ridicule of the spurious lutes of the romantic painters when Ségouin 
shepherded his party into politics. Here was congenial ground for all. Jimmy, 
under generous influences, felt the buried zeal of his father wake to life 
within him: he aroused the torpid Routh at last. The room grew doubly hot and 
Ségouin’s task grew harder each moment: there was even danger of personal 
spite. The alert host at an opportunity lifted his glass to Humanity and, when 
the toast had been drunk, he threw open a window significantly. 

That night the city wore the mask of a capital. The five young men strolled 
along Stephen’s Green in a faint cloud of aromatic smoke. They talked loudly 
and gaily and their cloaks dangled from their shoulders. The people made way 
for them. At the corner of Grafton Street a short fat man was putting two 
handsome ladies on a car in charge of another fat man. He had spoken of a 
mother's love. He felt then the sufferings of women, the weaknesses of their 
bodies and souls: and would shield them with a strong and resolute arm and bow 
his mind to them. 

Away then: it is time to go. He listened to Father Arnall's low and gentle 
voice as he corrected the themes. Perhaps he was sorry now and wanted to be 
decent. He wanted to cry. . And when I ask when my daughter is going to be paid 
I can’t get a civil answer. ” 

She tossed her head and assumed a haughty voice: 

“You must speak to the secretary. It’s not my business. I’m a great 
fellow fol-the-diddle-I-do. ” 

“I thought you were a lady,” said Mr Holohan, walking away from her 
abruptly. 

After that Mrs Kearney’s conduct was condemned on all hands: everyone 
approved of what the Committee had done. She stood at the door, haggard with 
rage, arguing with her husband and daughter, gesticulating with them. She 
waited until it was time for the second part to begin in the hope that the 
secretaries would approach her. But Miss Healy had kindly consented to play one 
or two accompaniments. Mrs Kearney had to stand aside to allow the baritone and 
his accompanist to pass up to the platform. She stood still for an instant like 
an angry stone image and, when the first notes of the song struck her ear, she 
caught up her daughter’s cloak and said to her husband: 

“Get a cab!” 

He went out at once. Mrs Kearney wrapped the cloak round her daughter and 
followed him. As she passed through the doorway she stopped and glared into Mr 
Holohan’s face. 

“I’m not done with you yet,” she said. 

“But I’m done with you,” said Mr Holohan. 

Kathleen followed her mother meekly. To the sellers in the market, to the 
barmen and barmaids, to the beggars who importuned him for a lob Mr Dedalus 
told the same tale--that he was an old Corkonian, that he had been trying for 
thirty years to get rid of his Cork accent up in Dublin and that Peter 
Pickackafax beside him was his eldest son but that he was only a Dublin 
jackeen. 

They had set out early in the morning from Newcombe's coffee-house, where Mr 
Dedalus's cup had rattled noisily against its saucer, and Stephen had tried to 
cover that shameful sign of his father's drinking bout of the night before by 
moving his chair and coughing. One humiliation had succeeded another--the false 
smiles of the market sellers, the curvetings and oglings of the barmaids with 
whom his father flirted, the compliments and encouraging words of his father's 
friends. They had told him that he had a great look of his grandfather and Mr 
Dedalus had agreed that he was an ugly likeness. They had unearthed traces of a 
Cork accent in his speech and made him admit that the Lee was a much finer 
river than the Liffey. One of them, in order to put his Latin to the proof, had 
made him translate short passages from Dilectus and asked him whether it was 
correct to say: TEMPORA MUTANTUR NOS ET MUTAMUR IN ILLIS or TEMPORA MUTANTUR ET 
NOS MUTAMUR IN ILLIS. Another, a brisk old man, whom Mr Dedalus called Johnny 
Cashman, had covered him with confusion by asking him to say which were 
prettier, the Dublin girls or the Cork girls. 

--He's not that way built, said Mr Dedalus. Leave him alone. 







OLD JACK raked the cinders together with a piece of cardboard and spread them 
judiciously over the whitening dome of coals. When the dome was thinly covered 
his face lapsed into darkness but, as he set himself to fan the fire again, his 
crouching shadow ascended the opposite wall and his face slowly re-emerged into 
light. It was an old man’s face, very bony and hairy. The moist blue eyes 
blinked at the fire and the moist mouth fell open at times, munching once or 
twice mechanically when it closed. When the cinders had caught he laid the 
piece of cardboard against the wall, sighed and said: 

“That’s better now, Mr O’Connor. ” 

Mr O’Connor, a grey-haired young man, whose face was disfigured by many 
blotches and pimples, had just brought the tobacco for a cigarette into a 
shapely cylinder but when spoken to he undid his handiwork meditatively. Then 
he began to roll the tobacco again meditatively and after a moment’s thought 
decided to lick the paper. 

“Did Mr Tierney say when he’d be back?” he asked in a husky falsetto. 

“He didn’t say. . . . . . . . ” 

“Let bygones be bygones,” said Mr Henchy. “I admire the man personally. 
He’s just an ordinary knockabout like you and me. He’s fond of his glass of 
grog and he’s a bit of a rake, perhaps, and he’s a good sportsman. Damn it, 
can’t we Irish play fair?” 

“That’s all very fine,” said Mr Lyons. “But look at the case of Parnell 
now. ” 

“In the name of God,” said Mr Henchy, “where’s the analogy between the 
two cases?” 

“What I mean,” said Mr Lyons, “is we have our ideals. Why, now, would we 
welcome a man like that? Do you think now after what he did Parnell was a fit 
man to lead us? And why, then, would we do it for Edward the Seventh?” 

“This is Parnell’s anniversary,” said Mr O’Connor, “and don’t let 
us stir up any bad blood. We all respect him now that he’s dead and 
gone--even the Conservatives,” he added, turning to Mr Crofton. 

Pok! The tardy cork flew out of Mr Crofton’s bottle. Mr Crofton got up from 
his box and went to the fire. . . . . 

The thought slid like a cold shining rapier into his tender flesh: confession. 
But not there in the chapel of the college. Other wrangle with little round 
head rogue's eye Ghezzi. This time about Bruno the Nolan. Began in Italian and 
ended in pidgin English. He said Bruno was a terrible heretic. I said he was 
terribly burned. He agreed to this with some sorrow. Then gave me recipe for 
what he calls RISOTTO ALLA BERGAMASCA. When he pronounces a soft O he protrudes 
his full carnal lips as if he kissed the vowel. Has he? And could he repent? 
Yes, he could: and cry two round rogue's tears, one from each eye. 

Crossing Stephen's, that is, my green, remembered that his countrymen and not 
mine had invented what Cranly the other night called our religion. A quartet of 
them, soldiers of the ninety-seventh infantry regiment, sat at the foot of the 
cross and tossed up dice for the overcoat of the crucified. 

Went to library. Tried to read three reviews. Useless. Soon they would be going 
home for the holidays. After supper in the study hall he would change the 
number pasted up inside his desk from seventy-seven to seventy-six. 

It would be better to be in the study hall than out there in the cold. The sky 
was pale and cold but there were lights in the castle. He wondered from which 
window Hamilton Rowan had thrown his hat on the ha-ha and had there been 
flowerbeds at that time under the windows. One day when he had been called to 
the castle the butler had shown him the marks of the soldiers' slugs in the 
wood of the door and had given him a piece of shortbread that the community 
ate. It was nice and warm to see the lights in the castle. He wondered from 
which window Hamilton Rowan had thrown his hat on the ha-ha and had there been 
flowerbeds at that time under the windows. One day when he had been called to 
the castle the butler had shown him the marks of the soldiers' slugs in the 
wood of the door and had given him a piece of shortbread that the community 
ate. It was nice and warm to see the lights in the castle. He wondered from 
which window Hamilton Rowan had thrown his hat on the ha-ha and had there been 
flowerbeds at that time under the windows. One day when he had been called to 
the castle the butler had shown him the marks of the soldiers' slugs in the 
wood of the door and had given him a piece of shortbread that the community 
ate. It was nice and warm to see the lights in the castle. It was like 
something in a book. Perhaps Leicester Abbey was like that. Wolsey died there. 
The abbots buried him themselves. 

It was not Wells's face, it was the prefect's. He was not foxing. No, no: he 
was sick really. He was not foxing. No, no: he was sick really. He was not 
foxing. And he felt the prefect's hand on his forehead; and he felt his 
forehead warm and damp against the prefect's cold damp hand. That was the way a 
rat felt, slimy and damp and cold. Every rat had two eyes to look out of. Every 
rat had two eyes to look out of. Sleek slimy coats, little little feet tucked 
up to jump, black slimy eyes to look out of. They could understand how to jump. 
But the minds of rats could not understand trigonometry. When they were dead 
they lay on their sides. Their coats dried then. They were only dead things. 

The prefect was there again and it was his voice that was saying that he was to 
get up, that Father Minister had said he was to get up and dress and go to the 
infirmary. And while he was dressing himself as quickly as he could the prefect 
said: 

--We must pack off to Brother Michael because we have the collywobbles! 

He was very decent to say that. That was all to make him laugh. He felt his 
whole body hot and confused in a moment. Turned off that valve at once and 
opened the spiritual-heroic refrigerating apparatus, invented and patented in 
all countries by Dante Alighieri. Talked rapidly of myself and my plans. In the 
midst of it unluckily I made a sudden gesture of a revolutionary nature. I must 
have looked like a fellow throwing a handful of peas into the air. In his 
imagination he beheld the pair of lovers walking along some dark road; he heard 
Corley’s voice in deep energetic gallantries and saw again the leer of the 
young woman’s mouth. This vision made him feel keenly his own poverty of 
purse and spirit. He was tired of knocking about, of pulling the devil by the 
tail, of shifts and intrigues. He would be thirty-one in November. Would he 
never get a good job? Would he never have a home of his own? He thought how 
pleasant it would be to have a warm fire to sit by and a good dinner to sit 
down to. He had walked the streets long enough with friends and with girls. He 
knew what those friends were worth: he knew the girls too. Experience had 
embittered his heart against the world. But all hope had not left him. He felt 
better after having eaten than he had felt before, less weary of his life, less 
vanquished in spirit. He might yet be able to settle down in some snug corner 
and live happily if he could only come across some good simple-minded girl with 
a little of the ready. 

He paid twopence halfpenny to the slatternly girl and went out of the shop to 
begin his wandering again. He went into Capel Street and walked along towards 
the City Hall. Ignatius Gallaher on the London Press! Who would have thought it 
possible eight years before? Still, now that he reviewed the past, Little 
Chandler could remember many signs of future greatness in his friend. People 
used to say that Ignatius Gallaher was wild. Of course, he did mix with a 
rakish set of fellows at that time, drank freely and borrowed money on all 
sides. In the end he had got mixed up in some shady affair, some money 
transaction: at least, that was one version of his flight. But nobody denied 
him talent. There was always a certain. The time and manner are uncertain, 
whether from long disease or from some unexpected accident: the Son of God 
cometh at an hour when you little expect Him. Be therefore ready every moment, 
seeing that you may die at any moment. ” 

While she was threading her way back across the room Mrs Malins, without 
adverting to the interruption, went on to tell Gabriel what beautiful places 
there were in Scotland and beautiful scenery. Her son-in-law brought them every 
year to the lakes and they used to go fishing. Her son-in-law was a splendid 
fisher. One day he caught a beautiful big fish and the man in the hotel cooked 
it for their dinner. 

Gabriel hardly heard what she said. Now that supper was coming near he began to 
think again about his speech and about the quotation. When he saw Freddy Malins 
coming across the room to visit his mother Gabriel left the chair free for him 
and retired into the embrasure of the window. The room had already cleared and 
from the back room came the clatter of plates and knives. Those who still 
remained in the drawing-room seemed tired of dancing and were conversing 
quietly in little groups. Gabriel’s warm trembling fingers tapped the cold 
pane of the window. How cool it must be outside! How pleasant it would be to 
walk out alone, first along by the river and then through the park! The snow 
would be lying on the branches of the trees and forming a bright cap on the top 
of the Wellington Monument. How much more pleasant it would be there than at 
the supper-table! 

He ran over the headings of his speech: Irish hospitality, sad memories, the 
Three Graces, Paris, the quotation from Browning. He repeated to himself a 
phrase he had written in his review: “One feels that one is listening to a 
thought-tormented music. ” Miss Ivors had praised the review. ” 

“And everything. . . here’s a little. . . . Poor O’Hara! Boose, I 
suppose?” 

“Other things, too,” said Little Chandler shortly. 

Ignatius Gallaher laughed. You could tell that at once by his travelled air, 
his well-cut tweed suit, and fearless accent. Few fellows had talents like his 
and fewer still could remain unspoiled by such success. Gallaher’s heart was 
in the right place and he had deserved to win. It was something to have a 
friend like that. 

Little Chandler’s thoughts ever since lunch-time had been of his meeting with 
Gallaher, of Gallaher’s invitation and of the great city London where 
Gallaher lived. He was called Little Chandler because, though he was but 
slightly under the average stature, he gave one the idea of being a little man. 
His hands were white and small, his frame was fragile, his voice was quiet and 
his manners were refined. He took the greatest care of his fair silken hair and 
moustache and used perfume discreetly on his handkerchief. The half-moons of 
his nails were perfect and when he smiled you caught a glimpse of a row of 
childish white teeth. 

As he sat at his desk in the King’s Inns he thought what changes those eight 
years had brought. The friend whom he had known under a shabby and necessitous 
guise had become a brilliant figure on the London Press. He turned often from 
his tiresome writing to gaze out of the office window. The glow of a late 
autumn sunset covered the grass plots and walks. It cast a shower of kindly 
golden dust on the untidy nurses and decrepit old men who drowsed on the 
benches; it flickered upon all the moving figures--on the children who ran 
screaming along the gravel paths and on everyone who passed through the 
gardens. He watched the scene and thought of life; and (as always happened when 
he thought of life) he became sad. A gentle melancholy took possession of him. 
He felt how useless it was to struggle against fortune, this being the burden 
of wisdom which the ages had bequeathed to him. 

He remembered the books of poetry upon his shelves at home. He had bought them 
in his bachelor days and many an evening, as he sat in the little room off the 
hall, he had been tempted to take one down from the bookshelf and read out 
something to his wife. But shyness had always held him back; and so the books 
had remained on their shelves. At times he repeated lines to himself and this 
consoled him. 

When his hour had struck he stood up and took leave of his desk and of his 
fellow-clerks punctiliously. He emerged from under the feudal arch of the 
King’s Inns, a neat modest figure, and walked swiftly down Henrietta Street. 
The golden sunset was waning and the air had grown sharp. A horde of grimy 
children populated the street. They stood or ran in the roadway or crawled up 
the steps before the gaping doors or squatted like mice upon the thresholds. 
Little Chandler gave them no thought. He picked his way deftly through all that 
minute vermin-like life and under the shadow of the gaunt spectral mansions in 
which the old nobility of Dublin had roystered. No memory of the past touched 
him, for his mind was full of a present joy. 

He had never been in Corless’s but he knew the value of the name. He knew 
that people went there after the theatre to eat oysters and drink liqueurs; and 
he had heard that the waiters there spoke French and German. Walking swiftly by 
at night he had seen cabs drawn up before the door and richly dressed ladies, 
escorted by cavaliers, alight and enter quickly. They wore noisy dresses and 
many wraps. Their faces were powdered and they caught up their dresses, when 
they touched earth, like alarmed Atalantas. He had always passed without 
turning his head to look. It was his habit to walk swiftly in the street even 
by day and whenever he found himself in the city late at night he hurried on 
his way apprehensively and excitedly. Sometimes, however, he courted the causes 
of his fear. He chose the darkest and narrowest streets and, as he walked 
boldly forward, the silence that was spread about his footsteps troubled him, 
the wandering silent figures troubled him; and at times a sound of low fugitive 
laughter made him tremble like a leaf. 

He turned to the right towards Capel Street. Then he turned into Dame Street. 
The street was busy with unusual traffic, loud with the horns of motorists and 
the gongs of impatient tram-drivers. Near the Bank Ségouin drew up and Jimmy 
and his friend alighted. A little knot of people collected on the footpath to 
pay homage to the snorting motor. The party was to dine together that evening 
in Ségouin’s hotel and, meanwhile, Jimmy and his friend, who was staying 
with him, were to go home to dress. The car steered out slowly for Grafton 
Street while the two young men pushed their way through the knot of gazers. 
They walked northward with a curious feeling of disappointment in the exercise, 
while the city hung its pale globes of light above them in a haze of summer 
evening. 

In Jimmy’s house this dinner had been pronounced an occasion. A certain pride 
mingled with his parents’ trepidation, a certain eagerness, also, to play 
fast and loose for the names of great foreign cities have at least this virtue. 
Jimmy, too, looked very well when he was dressed and, as he stood in the hall 
giving a last equation to the bows of his dress tie, his father may have felt 
even commercially satisfied at having secured for his son qualities often 
unpurchaseable. His father, therefore, was unusually friendly with Villona and 
his manner expressed a real respect for foreign accomplishments; but this 
subtlety of his host was probably lost upon the Hungarian, who was beginning to 
have a sharp desire for his dinner. 

The dinner was excellent, exquisite. Ségouin, Jimmy decided, had a very 
refined taste. The party was increased by a young Englishman named Routh whom 
Jimmy had seen with Ségouin at Cambridge. The young men supped in a snug room 
lit by electric candle-lamps. They talked volubly and with little reserve. 
Jimmy, whose imagination was kindling, conceived the lively youth of the 
Frenchmen twined elegantly upon the firm framework of the Englishman’s 
manner. A graceful image of his, he thought, and a just one. He admired the 
dexterity with which their host directed the conversation. The five young men 
had various tastes and their tongues had been loosened. Villona, with immense 
respect, began to discover to the mildly surprised Englishman the beauties of 
the English madrigal, deploring the loss of old instruments. Rivière, not 
wholly ingenuously, undertook to explain to Jimmy the triumph of the French 
mechanicians. The resonant voice of the Hungarian was about to prevail in 
ridicule of the spurious lutes of the romantic painters when Ségouin 
shepherded his party into politics. Here was congenial ground for all. Jimmy, 
under generous influences, felt the buried zeal of his father wake to life 
within him: he aroused the torpid Routh at last. The room grew doubly hot and 
Ségouin’s task grew harder each moment: there was even danger of personal 
spite. The alert host at an opportunity lifted his glass to Humanity and, when 
the toast had been drunk, he threw open a window significantly. 

That night the city wore the mask of a capital. The five young men strolled 
along Stephen’s Green in a faint cloud of aromatic smoke. They talked loudly 
and gaily and their cloaks dangled from their shoulders. The people made way 
for them. The man out of the last house passed on his way home; she heard his 
footsteps clacking along the concrete pavement and afterwards crunching on the 
cinder path before the new red houses. One time there used to be a field there 
in which they used to play every evening with other people’s children. Then a 
man from Belfast bought the field and built houses in it--not like their little 
brown houses but bright brick houses with shining roofs. The children of the 
avenue used to play together in that field--the Devines, the Waters, the Dunns, 
little Keogh the cripple, she and her brothers and sisters. Ernest, however, 
never played: he was too grown up. Her father used often to hunt them in out of 
the field with his blackthorn stick; but usually little Keogh used to keep 
_nix_ and call out when he saw her father coming. Still they seemed to have 
been rather happy then. . . . Ah! EVER REACHING. That's another story. His eyes 
moved to the chair over which she had thrown some of her clothes. A petticoat 
string dangled to the floor. One boot stood upright, its limp upper fallen 
down: the fellow of it lay upon its side. He wondered at his riot of emotions 
of an hour before. From what had it proceeded? From his aunt’s supper, from 
his own foolish speech, from the wine and dancing, the merry-making when saying 
good-night in the hall, the pleasure of the walk along the river in the snow. 
Poor Aunt Julia! She, too, would soon be a shade with the shade of Patrick 
Morkan and his horse. He had caught that haggard look upon her face for a 
moment when she was singing _Arrayed for the Bridal_. Soon, perhaps, he would 
be sitting in that same drawing-room, dressed in black, his silk hat on his 
knees. The blinds would be drawn down and Aunt Kate would be sitting beside 
him, crying and blowing her nose and telling him how Julia had died. He would 
cast about in his mind for some words that might console her, and would find 
only lame and useless ones. Yes, yes: that would happen very soon. 

The air of the room chilled his shoulders. He stretched himself cautiously 
along under the sheets and lay down beside his wife. A woman came running down 
the front steps and coughed. Corley turned and went towards her. He sauntered 
across the road swaying his head from side to side. His bulk, his easy pace, 
and the solid sound of his boots had something of the conqueror in them. He 
approached the young woman and, without saluting, began at once to converse 
with her. She swung her umbrella more quickly and executed half turns on her 
heels. Once or twice when he spoke to her at close quarters she laughed and 
bent her head. 

Lenehan observed them for a few minutes. Then he walked rapidly along beside 
the chains at some distance and crossed the road obliquely. As he approached 
Hume Street corner he found the air heavily scented and his eyes made a swift 
anxious scrutiny of the young woman’s appearance. She had her Sunday finery 
on. Her blue serge skirt was held at the waist by a belt of black leather. He 
had a big face which resembled a young ox’s face in expression, staring blue 
eyes and a grizzled moustache. The other man, who was much younger and frailer, 
had a thin, clean-shaven face. He wore a very high double collar and a 
wide-brimmed bowler hat. 

“Hello, Crofton!” said Mr Henchy to the fat man. “Talk of the devil. . 
there was something uncanny about him. I’ll tell you my opinion. . I’ll say 
a _Hail Mary_. . What?” 

His bright, small eyes searched his companion’s face for reassurance. Corley 
swung his head to and fro as if to toss aside an insistent insect, and his 
brows gathered. 

“I’ll pull it off,” he said. “Leave it to me, can’t you?” 

Lenehan said no more. He did not wish to ruffle his friend’s temper, to be 
sent to the devil and told that his advice was not wanted. A little tact was 
necessary. But Corley’s brow was soon smooth again. His thoughts were running 
another way. 

“She’s a fine decent tart,” he said, with appreciation; “that’s what 
she is. ” 

They walked along Nassau Street and then turned into Kildare Street. Not far 
from the porch of the club a harpist stood in the roadway, playing to a little 
ring of listeners. His softly padded feet played the melody while his fingers 
swept a scale of variations idly along the railings after each group of notes. 

He walked listlessly round Stephen’s Green and then down Grafton Street. 
Though his eyes took note of many elements of the crowd through which he passed 
they did so morosely. He found trivial all that was meant to charm him and did 
not answer the glances which invited him to be bold. He knew that he would have 
to speak a great deal, to invent and to amuse, and his brain and throat were 
too dry for such a task. The problem of how he could pass the hours till he met 
Corley again troubled him a little. He could think of no way of passing them 
but to keep on walking. He turned to the left when he came to the corner of 
Rutland Square and felt more at ease in the dark quiet street, the sombre look 
of which suited his mood. One of them was just bringing a long monologue to a 
close. The other, who walked on the verge of the path and was at times obliged 
to step on to the road, owing to his companion’s rudeness, wore an amused 
listening face. He was squat and ruddy. A yachting cap was shoved far back from 
his forehead and the narrative to which he listened made constant waves of 
expression break forth over his face from the corners of his nose and eyes and 
mouth. Little jets of wheezing laughter followed one another out of his 
convulsed body. His eyes, twinkling with cunning enjoyment, glanced at every 
moment towards his companion’s face. Once or twice he rearranged the light 
waterproof which he had slung over one shoulder in toreador fashion. His 
breeches, his white rubber shoes and his jauntily slung waterproof expressed 
youth. But his figure fell into rotundity at the waist, his hair was scant and 
grey and his face, when the waves of expression had passed over it, had a 
ravaged look. 

When he was quite sure that the narrative had ended he laughed noiselessly for 
fully half a minute. Then he said: 

“Well!. . I was afraid, man, she’d get in the family way. But she’s up to 
the dodge. ” 

“Maybe she thinks you’ll marry her,” said Lenehan. 

“I told her I was out of a job,” said Corley. “I told her I was in 
Pim’s. She doesn’t know my name. I was too hairy to tell her that. But she 
thinks I’m a bit of class, you know. ” 

Lenehan laughed again, noiselessly. 

“Of all the good ones ever I heard,” he said, “that emphatically takes 
the biscuit. ” 

Corley’s stride acknowledged the compliment. They did not seem to be 
speaking. An intimation of the result pricked him like the point of a sharp 
instrument. He knew Corley would fail; he knew it was no go. 

They turned down Baggot Street and he followed them at once, taking the other 
footpath. Every morning he came in from Chapelizod by tram. 

The proprietor served him obsequiously but did not venture to talk. There were 
five or six workingmen in the shop discussing the value of a gentleman’s 
estate in County Kildare. They drank at intervals from their huge pint tumblers 
and smoked, spitting often on the floor and sometimes dragging the sawdust over 
their spits with their heavy boots. Mr Duffy sat on his stool and gazed at 
them, without seeing or hearing them. After a while they went out and he called 
for another punch. He sat a long time over it. The shop was very quiet. The 
proprietor sprawled on the counter reading the _Herald_ and yawning. Now and 
again a tram was heard swishing along the lonely road outside. 

As he sat there, living over his life with her and evoking alternately the two 
images in which he now conceived her, he realised that she was dead, that she 
had ceased to exist, that she had become a memory. He began to feel ill at 
ease. He asked himself what else could he have done. He could not have carried 
on a comedy of deception with her; he could not have lived with her openly. He 
had done what seemed to him best. ” 

The trial began again. The veins stood out on Farrington’s forehead, and the 
pallor of Weathers’ complexion changed to peony. Their hands and arms 
trembled under the stress. After a long struggle Weathers again brought his 
opponent’s hand slowly on to the table. There was a murmur of applause from 
the spectators. Then as to money--he really had a great sum under his control. 
Ségouin, perhaps, would not think it a great sum but Jimmy who, in spite of 
temporary errors, was at heart the inheritor of solid instincts knew well with 
what difficulty it had been got together. This knowledge had previously kept 
his bills within the limits of reasonable recklessness, and, if he had been so 
conscious of the labour latent in money when there had been question merely of 
some freak of the higher intelligence, how much more so now when he was about 
to stake the greater part of his substance! It was a serious thing for him. 

Of course, the investment was a good one and Ségouin had managed to give the 
impression that it was by a favour of friendship the mite of Irish money was to 
be included in the capital of the concern. Jimmy had a respect for his 
father’s shrewdness in business matters and in this case it had been his 
father who had first suggested the investment; money to be made in the motor 
business, pots of money. Moreover Ségouin had the unmistakable air of wealth. 
Jimmy set out to translate into days’ work that lordly car in which he sat. 
How smoothly it ran. In what style they had come careering along the country 
roads! The journey laid a magical finger on the genuine pulse of life and 
gallantly the machinery of human nerves strove to answer the bounding courses 
of the swift blue animal. 

They drove down Dame Street. The street was busy with unusual traffic, loud 
with the horns of motorists and the gongs of impatient tram-drivers. Near the 
Bank Ségouin drew up and Jimmy and his friend alighted. A little knot of 
people collected on the footpath to pay homage to the snorting motor. The party 
was to dine together that evening in Ségouin’s hotel and, meanwhile, Jimmy 
and his friend, who was staying with him, were to go home to dress. The car 
steered out slowly for Grafton Street while the two young men pushed their way 
through the knot of gazers. They walked northward with a curious feeling of 
disappointment in the exercise, while the city hung its pale globes of light 
above them in a haze of summer evening. 

In Jimmy’s house this dinner had been pronounced an occasion. A certain pride 
mingled with his parents’ trepidation, a certain eagerness, also, to play 
fast and loose for the names of great foreign cities have at least this virtue. 
Jimmy, too, looked very well when he was dressed and, as he stood in the hall 
giving a last equation to the bows of his dress tie, his father may have felt 
even commercially satisfied at having secured for his son qualities often 
unpurchaseable. His father, therefore, was unusually friendly with Villona and 
his manner expressed a real respect for foreign accomplishments; but this 
subtlety of his host was probably lost upon the Hungarian, who was beginning to 
have a sharp desire for his dinner. 

The dinner was excellent, exquisite. Ségouin, Jimmy decided, had a very 
refined taste. The party was increased by a young Englishman named Routh whom 
Jimmy had seen with Ségouin at Cambridge. The young men supped in a snug room 
lit by electric candle-lamps. They talked volubly and with little reserve. 
Jimmy, whose imagination was kindling, conceived the lively youth of the 
Frenchmen twined elegantly upon the firm framework of the Englishman’s 
manner. A graceful image of his, he thought, and a just one. He admired the 
dexterity with which their host directed the conversation. The five young men 
had various tastes and their tongues had been loosened. Villona, with immense 
respect, began to discover to the mildly surprised Englishman the beauties of 
the English madrigal, deploring the loss of old instruments. Rivière, not 
wholly ingenuously, undertook to explain to Jimmy the triumph of the French 
mechanicians. The resonant voice of the Hungarian was about to prevail in 
ridicule of the spurious lutes of the romantic painters when Ségouin 
shepherded his party into politics. Here was congenial ground for all. Jimmy, 
under generous influences, felt the buried zeal of his father wake to life 
within him: he aroused the torpid Routh at last. The room grew doubly hot and 
Ségouin’s task grew harder each moment: there was even danger of personal 
spite. The alert host at an opportunity lifted his glass to Humanity and, when 
the toast had been drunk, he threw open a window significantly. 

That night the city wore the mask of a capital. The five young men strolled 
along Stephen’s Green in a faint cloud of aromatic smoke. They talked loudly 
and gaily and their cloaks dangled from their shoulders. The people made way 
for them. The man out of the last house passed on his way home; she heard his 
footsteps clacking along the concrete pavement and afterwards crunching on the 
cinder path before the new red houses. One time there used to be a field there 
in which they used to play every evening with other people’s children. Then a 
man from Belfast bought the field and built houses in it--not like their little 
brown houses but bright brick houses with shining roofs. The children of the 
avenue used to play together in that field--the Devines, the Waters, the Dunns, 
little Keogh the cripple, she and her brothers and sisters. Ernest, however, 
never played: he was too grown up. Her father used often to hunt them in out of 
the field with his blackthorn stick; but usually little Keogh used to keep 
_nix_ and call out when he saw her father coming. Still they seemed to have 
been rather happy then. 

How pale the light was at the window! But that was nice. The fire rose and fell 
on the wall. It was like waves. Or the waves were talking among themselves as 
they rose and fell. 

He saw the sea of waves, long dark waves rising and falling, dark under the 
moonless night. A tiny light twinkled at the pierhead where the ship was 
entering: and he saw a multitude of people gathered by the waters' edge to see 
the ship that was entering their harbour. A tall man stood on the deck, looking 
out towards the flat dark land: and by the light at the pierhead he saw his 
face, the sorrowful face of Brother Michael. 

He saw him lift his hand towards the people and heard him say in a loud voice 
of sorrow over the waters: 

--He is dead. We saw him lying upon the catafalque. A wail of sorrow went up 
from the people. 

--Parnell! Parnell! He is dead! 

They fell upon their knees, moaning in sorrow. 

And he saw Dante in a maroon velvet dress and with a green velvet mantle 
hanging from her shoulders walking proudly and silently past the people who 
knelt by the water's edge. 



* * * * * 



A great fire, banked high and red, flamed in the grate and under the They had 
come home a little late and still dinner was not ready: but it would be ready 
in a jiffy his mother had said. They were waiting for the door to open and for 
the servants to come in, holding the big dishes covered with their heavy metal 
covers. 

All were waiting: uncle Charles, who sat far away in the shadow of the window, 
Dante and Mr Casey, who sat in the easy-chairs at either side of the hearth, 
Stephen, seated on a chair between them, his feet resting on the toasted boss. 
Mr Dedalus looked at himself in the pierglass above the mantelpiece, waxed out 
his moustache ends and then, parting his coat-tails, stood with his back to the 
glowing fire: and still from time to time he withdrew a hand from his coat-tail 
to wax out one of his moustache ends. Mr Casey leaned his head to one side and, 
smiling, tapped the gland of his neck with his fingers. And Stephen smiled too 
for he knew now that it was not true that Mr Casey had a purse of silver in his 
throat. He smiled to think how the silvery noise which Mr Casey used to make 
had deceived him. And when he had tried to open Mr Casey's hand to see if the 
purse of silver was hidden there he had seen that the fingers could not be 
straightened out: and Mr Casey had told him that he had got those three cramped 
fingers making a birthday present for Queen Victoria. Mr Casey tapped the gland 
of his neck and smiled at Stephen with sleepy eyes: and Mr Dedalus said to him: 

--Yes. And Stephen smiled too for he knew now that it was not true that Mr 
Casey had a purse of silver in his throat. He smiled to think how the silvery 
noise which Mr Casey used to make had deceived him. And when he had tried to 
open Mr Casey's hand to see if the purse of silver was hidden there he had seen 
that the fingers could not be straightened out: and Mr Casey had told him that 
he had got those three cramped fingers making a birthday present for Queen 
Victoria. Mr Casey tapped the gland of his neck and smiled at Stephen with 
sleepy eyes: and Mr Dedalus said to him: 

--Yes. And Stephen smiled too for he knew now that it was not true that Mr 
Casey had a purse of silver in his throat. He smiled to think how the silvery 
noise which Mr Casey used to make had deceived him. And when he had tried to 
open Mr Casey's hand to see if the purse of silver was hidden there he had seen 
that the fingers could not be straightened out: and Mr Casey had told him that 
he had got those three cramped fingers making a birthday present for Queen 
Victoria. Mr Casey tapped the gland of his neck and smiled at Stephen with 
sleepy eyes: and Mr Dedalus said to him: 

--Yes. And Stephen smiled too for he knew now that it was not true that Mr 
Casey had a purse of silver in his throat. He smiled to think how the silvery 
noise which Mr Casey used to make had deceived him. And when he had tried to 
open Mr Casey's hand to see if the purse of silver was hidden there he had seen 
that the fingers could not be straightened out: and Mr Casey had told him that 
he had got those three cramped fingers making a birthday present for Queen 
Victoria. Mr Casey tapped the gland of his neck and smiled at Stephen with 
sleepy eyes: and Mr Dedalus said to him: 

--Yes. And Stephen smiled too for he knew now that it was not true that Mr 
Casey had a purse of silver in his throat. He smiled to think how the silvery 
noise which Mr Casey used to make had deceived him. And when he had tried to 
open Mr Casey's hand to see if the purse of silver was hidden there he had seen 
that the fingers could not be straightened out: and Mr Casey had told him that 
he had got those three cramped fingers making a birthday present for Queen 
Victoria. Mr Casey tapped the gland of his neck and smiled at Stephen with 
sleepy eyes: and Mr Dedalus said to him: 

--Yes. And Stephen smiled too for he knew now that it was not true that Mr 
Casey had a purse of silver in his throat. He smiled to think how the silvery 
noise which Mr Casey used to make had deceived him. And when he had tried to 
open Mr Casey's hand to see if the purse of silver was hidden there he had seen 
that the fingers could not be straightened out: and Mr Casey had told him that 
he had got those three cramped fingers making a birthday present for Queen 
Victoria. Mr Casey tapped the gland of his neck and smiled at Stephen with 
sleepy eyes: and Mr Dedalus said to him: 

--Yes. Well now, that's all right. You're a born sneerer, Stevie. 

--When you make the next rebellion with hurleysticks, said Stephen, and want 
the indispensable informer, tell me. I can find you a few in this college. ” 

But if, as might happen, there were some discrepancies, to admit the truth, to 
be frank and say like a man: 

“Well, I have looked into my accounts. I find this wrong and this wrong. But, 
with God’s grace, I will rectify this and this. I will set right my accounts. 
” 





THE DEAD 

LILY, the caretaker’s daughter, was literally run off her feet. Hardly had 
she brought one gentleman into the little pantry behind the office on the 
ground floor and helped him off with his overcoat than the wheezy hall-door 
bell clanged again and she had to scamper along the bare hallway to let in 
another guest. It was well for her she had not to attend to the ladies also. 
But Miss Kate and Miss Julia had thought of that and had converted the bathroom 
upstairs into a ladies’ dressing-room. Miss Kate and Miss Julia were there, 
gossiping and laughing and fussing, walking after each other to the head of the 
stairs, peering down over the banisters and calling down to Lily to ask her who 
had come. 

It was always a great affair, the Misses Morkan’s annual dance. Everybody who 
knew them came to it, members of the family, old friends of the family, the 
members of Julia’s choir, any of Kate’s pupils that were grown up enough, 
and even some of Mary Jane’s pupils too. Never once had it fallen flat. For 
years and years it had gone off in splendid style as long as anyone could 
remember; ever since Kate and Julia, after the death of their brother Pat, had 
left the house in Stoney Batter and taken Mary Jane, their only niece, to live 
with them in the dark gaunt house on Usher’s Island, the upper part of which 
they had rented from Mr Fulham, the corn-factor on the ground floor. That was a 
good thirty years ago if it was a day. Mary Jane, who was then a little girl in 
short clothes, was now the main prop of the household, for she had the organ in 
Haddington Road. She had been through the Academy and gave a pupils’ concert 
every year in the upper room of the Antient Concert Rooms. Many of her pupils 
belonged to the better-class families on the Kingstown and Dalkey line. Old as 
they were, her aunts also did their share. Julia, though she was quite grey, 
was still the leading soprano in Adam and Eve’s, and Kate, being too feeble 
to go about much, gave music lessons to beginners on the old square piano in 
the back room. Lily, the caretaker’s daughter, did housemaid’s work for 
them. Though their life was modest they believed in eating well; the best of 
everything: diamond-bone sirloins, three-shilling tea and the best bottled 
stout. But Lily seldom made a mistake in the orders so that she got on well 
with her three mistresses. They were fussy, that was all. But the only thing 
they would not stand was back answers. She said she would do without any tea 
but when it came near the time at which the shop at the corner closed she 
decided to go out herself for a quarter of a pound of tea and two pounds of 
sugar. She put the sleeping child deftly in his arms and said: 

“Here. Don’t waken him. ” 

A little lamp with a white china shade stood upon the table and its light fell 
over a photograph which was enclosed in a frame of crumpled horn. It was 
Annie’s photograph. Little Chandler looked at it, pausing at the thin tight 
lips. She wore the pale blue summer blouse which he had brought her home as a 
present one Saturday. It had cost him ten and elevenpence; but what an agony of 
nervousness it had cost him! How he had suffered that day, waiting at the shop 
door until the shop was empty, standing at the counter and trying to appear at 
his ease while the girl piled ladies’ blouses before him, paying at the desk 
and forgetting to take up the odd penny of his change, being called back by the 
cashier, and finally, striving to hide his blushes as he left the shop by 
examining the parcel to see if it was securely tied. When he brought the blouse 
home Annie kissed him and said it was very pretty and stylish; but when she 
heard the price she threw the blouse on the table and said it was a regular 
swindle to charge ten and elevenpence for it. At first she wanted to take it 
back but when she tried it on she was delighted with it, especially with the 
make of the sleeves, and kissed him and said he was very good to think of her. 

Hm!. . all that business. 

His smiling eyes were fixed on a silver-wrapped tablet of milk chocolate which 
peeped out of the propagandist's breast-pocket. A little ring of listeners 
closed round to hear the war of wits. A lean student with olive skin and lank 
black hair thrust his face between the two, glancing from one to the other at 
each phrase and seeming to try to catch each flying phrase in his open moist 
mouth. Cranly took a small grey handball from his pocket and began to examine 
it closely, turning it over and over. 

--Next business? said MacCann. Hom! 

He gave a loud cough of laughter, smiled broadly and tugged twice at the 
straw-coloured goatee which hung from his blunt chin. 

--The next business is to sign the testimonial. 

--Will you pay me anything if I sign? asked Stephen. 

--I thought you were an idealist, said MacCann. 

The gipsy-like student looked about him and addressed the onlookers in an 
indistinct bleating voice. 

--By hell, that's a queer notion. I consider that notion to be a mercenary 
notion. 

His voice faded into silence. No heed was paid to his words. He turned his 
olive face, equine in expression, towards Stephen, inviting him to speak again. 

MacCann began to speak with fluent energy of the Tsar's rescript, of Stead, of 
general disarmament arbitration in cases of international disputes, of the 
signs of the times, of the new humanity and the new gospel of life which would 
make it the business of the community to secure as cheaply as possible the 
greatest possible happiness of the greatest possible number. 

The gipsy student responded to the close of the period by crying: 

--Three cheers for universal brotherhood! 

--Go on, Temple, said a stout ruddy student near him. I'll stand you a pint 
after. 

--I'm a believer in universal brotherhood, said Temple, glancing about him out 
of his dark oval eyes. Marx is only a bloody cod. 

Cranly gripped his arm tightly to check his tongue, smiling uneasily, and 
repeated: 

--Easy, easy, easy! 

Temple struggled to free his arm but continued, his mouth flecked by a thin 
foam: 

--Socialism was founded by an Irishman and the first man in Europe who preached 
the freedom of thought was Collins. Two hundred years ago. He denounced 
priestcraft, the philosopher of Middlesex. Three cheers for John Anthony 
Collins! 

A thin voice from the verge of the ring replied: 

--Pip! pip! 

Moynihan murmured beside Stephen's ear: 

--And what about John Anthony's poor little sister: 

Lottie Collins lost her drawers; Won't you kindly lend her yours? 

Stephen laughed and Moynihan, pleased with the result, murmured again: 

--We'll have five bob each way on John Anthony Collins. 

--I am waiting for your answer, said MacCann briefly. 

--The affair doesn't interest me in the least, said Stephen wearily. You know 
that well. Why do you make a scene about it? 

--Good! said MacCann, smacking his lips. You are a reactionary, then? 

--Do you think you impress me, Stephen asked, when you flourish your wooden 
sword? 

--Metaphors! said MacCann bluntly. Come to facts. 

Stephen blushed and turned aside. MacCann stood his ground and said with 
hostile humour: 

--Minor poets, I suppose, are above such trivial questions as the question of 
universal peace. 

Cranly raised his head and held the handball between the two students by way of 
a peace-offering, saying: 

--PAX SUPER TOTUM SANGUINARIUM GLOBUM. 

Stephen, moving away the bystanders, jerked his shoulder angrily in the 
direction of the Tsar's image, saying: 

--Keep your icon. If we must have a Jesus let us have a legitimate Jesus. 

--By hell, that's a good one! said the gipsy student to those about him, that's 
a fine expression. I like that expression immensely. 

He gulped down the spittle in his throat as if he were gulping down the phrase 
and, fumbling at the peak of his tweed cap, turned to Stephen, saying: 

--Excuse me, sir, what do you mean by that expression you uttered just now? 

Feeling himself jostled by the students near him, he said to them: 

--I am curious to know now what he meant by that expression. 

He turned again to Stephen and said in a whisper: 

--Do you believe in Jesus? I believe in man. Of course, I don't know if you 
believe in man. . He. . UK! 

--Stephaneforos! 

His throat ached with a desire to cry aloud, the cry of a hawk or eagle on 
high, to cry piercingly of his deliverance to the winds. This was the call of 
life to his soul not the dull gross voice of the world of duties and despair, 
not the inhuman voice that had called him to the pale service of the altar. An 
instant of wild flight had delivered him and the cry of triumph which his lips 
withheld cleft his brain. 

--Stephaneforos! 

What were they now but cerements shaken from the body of death--the fear he had 
walked in night and day, the incertitude that had ringed him round, the shame 
that had abased him within and without--cerements, the linens of the grave? 

His soul had arisen from the grave of boyhood, spurning her grave-clothes. Yes! 
Yes! Yes! He would create proudly out of the freedom and power of his soul, as 
the great artificer whose name he bore, a living thing, new and soaring and 
beautiful, impalpable, imperishable. 

He started up nervously from the stone-block for he could no longer quench the 
flame in his blood. He felt his cheeks aflame and his throat throbbing with 
song. There was a lust of wandering in his feet that burned to set out for the 
ends of the earth. On! On! his heart seemed to cry. Evening would deepen above 
the sea, night fall upon the plains, dawn glimmer before the wanderer and show 
him strange fields and hills and faces. Where? 

He looked northward towards Howth. The sea had fallen below the line of 
seawrack on the shallow side of the breakwater and already the tide was running 
out fast along the foreshore. Already one long oval bank of sand lay warm and 
dry amid the wavelets. Here and there warm isles of sand gleamed above the 
shallow tide and about the isles and around the long bank and amid the shallow 
currents of the beach were lightclad figures, wading and delving. 

In a few moments he was barefoot, his stockings folded in his pockets and his 
canvas shoes dangling by their knotted laces over his shoulders and, picking a 
pointed salt-eaten stick out of the jetsam among the rocks, he clambered down 
the slope of the breakwater. 

There was a long rivulet in the strand and, as he waded slowly up its course, 
he wondered at the endless drift of seaweed. Emerald and black and russet and 
olive, it moved beneath the current, swaying and turning. The water of the 
rivulet was dark with endless drift and mirrored the high-drifting clouds. The 
clouds were drifting above him silently and silently the seatangle was drifting 
below him and the grey warm air was still and a new wild life was singing in 
his veins. 

Where was his boyhood now? Where was the soul that had hung back from her 
destiny, to brood alone upon the shame of her wounds and in her house of 
squalor and subterfuge to queen it in faded cerements and in wreaths that 
withered at the touch? Or where was he? 

He was alone. He was unheeded, happy and near to the wild heart of life. He was 
alone and young and wilful and wildhearted, alone amid a waste of wild air and 
brackish waters and the sea-harvest of shells and tangle and veiled grey 
sunlight and gayclad lightclad figures of children and girls and voices 
childish and girlish in the air. 

A girl stood before him in midstream, alone and still, gazing out to sea. She 
seemed like one whom magic had changed into the likeness of a strange and 
beautiful seabird. Her long slender bare legs were delicate as a crane's and 
pure save where an emerald trail of seaweed had fashioned itself as a sign upon 
the flesh. Her thighs, fuller and soft-hued as ivory, were bared almost to the 
hips, where the white fringes of her drawers were like feathering of soft white 
down. Her slate-blue skirts were kilted boldly about her waist and dovetailed 
behind her. Her bosom was as a bird's, soft and slight, slight and soft as the 
breast of some dark-plumaged dove. But her long fair hair was girlish: and 
girlish, and touched with the wonder of mortal beauty, her face. 

She was alone and still, gazing out to sea; and when she felt his presence and 
the worship of his eyes her eyes turned to him in quiet sufferance of his gaze, 
without shame or wantonness. Long, long she suffered his gaze and then quietly 
withdrew her eyes from his and bent them towards the stream, gently stirring 
the water with her foot hither and thither. The first faint noise of gently 
moving water broke the silence, low and faint and whispering, faint as the 
bells of sleep; hither and thither, hither and thither; and a faint flame 
trembled on her cheek. 

--Heavenly God! cried Stephen's soul, in an outburst of profane joy. 

He turned away from her suddenly and set off across the strand. His cheeks were 
aflame; his body was aglow; his limbs were trembling. On and on and on and on 
he strode, far out over the sands, singing wildly to the sea, crying to greet 
the advent of the life that had cried to him. 

Her image had passed into his soul for ever and no word had broken the holy 
silence of his ecstasy. Her eyes had called him and his soul had leaped at the 
call. To live, to err, to fall, to triumph, to recreate life out of life! A 
wild angel had appeared to him, the angel of mortal youth and beauty, an envoy 
from the fair courts of life, to throw open before him in an instant of ecstasy 
the gates of all the ways of error and glory. On and on and on and on! 

He halted suddenly and heard his heart in the silence. Evening would deepen 
above the sea, night fall upon the plains, dawn glimmer before the wanderer and 
show him strange fields and hills and faces. Where? 

He looked northward towards Howth. The sea had fallen below the line of 
seawrack on the shallow side of the breakwater and already the tide was running 
out fast along the foreshore. Already one long oval bank of sand lay warm and 
dry amid the wavelets. Here and there warm isles of sand gleamed above the 
shallow tide and about the isles and around the long bank and amid the shallow 
currents of the beach were lightclad figures, wading and delving. 

In a few moments he was barefoot, his stockings folded in his pockets and his 
canvas shoes dangling by their knotted laces over his shoulders and, picking a 
pointed salt-eaten stick out of the jetsam among the rocks, he clambered down 
the slope of the breakwater. 

There was a long rivulet in the strand and, as he waded slowly up its course, 
he wondered at the endless drift of seaweed. Emerald and black and russet and 
olive, it moved beneath the current, swaying and turning. The water of the 
rivulet was dark with endless drift and mirrored the high-drifting clouds. The 
clouds were drifting above him silently and silently the seatangle was drifting 
below him and the grey warm air was still and a new wild life was singing in 
his veins. 

Where was his boyhood now? Where was the soul that had hung back from her 
destiny, to brood alone upon the shame of her wounds and in her house of 
squalor and subterfuge to queen it in faded cerements and in wreaths that 
withered at the touch? Or where was he? 

He was alone. He was unheeded, happy and near to the wild heart of life. He was 
alone and young and wilful and wildhearted, alone amid a waste of wild air and 
brackish waters and the sea-harvest of shells and tangle and veiled grey 
sunlight and gayclad lightclad figures of children and girls and voices 
childish and girlish in the air. 

A girl stood before him in midstream, alone and still, gazing out to sea. She 
seemed like one whom magic had changed into the likeness of a strange and 
beautiful seabird. Her long slender bare legs were delicate as a crane's and 
pure save where an emerald trail of seaweed had fashioned itself as a sign upon 
the flesh. Her thighs, fuller and soft-hued as ivory, were bared almost to the 
hips, where the white fringes of her drawers were like feathering of soft white 
down. Her slate-blue skirts were kilted boldly about her waist and dovetailed 
behind her. Her bosom was as a bird's, soft and slight, slight and soft as the 
breast of some dark-plumaged dove. But her long fair hair was girlish: and 
girlish, and touched with the wonder of mortal beauty, her face. 

She was alone and still, gazing out to sea; and when she felt his presence and 
the worship of his eyes her eyes turned to him in quiet sufferance of his gaze, 
without shame or wantonness. Long, long she suffered his gaze and then quietly 
withdrew her eyes from his and bent them towards the stream, gently stirring 
the water with her foot hither and thither. The first faint noise of gently 
moving water broke the silence, low and faint and whispering, faint as the 
bells of sleep; hither and thither, hither and thither; and a faint flame 
trembled on her cheek. 

--Heavenly God! cried Stephen's soul, in an outburst of profane joy. 

He turned away from her suddenly and set off across the strand. His cheeks were 
aflame; his body was aglow; his limbs were trembling. On and on and on and on 
he strode, far out over the sands, singing wildly to the sea, crying to greet 
the advent of the life that had cried to him. 

Her image had passed into his soul for ever and no word had broken the holy 
silence of his ecstasy. Her eyes had called him and his soul had leaped at the 
call. To live, to err, to fall, to triumph, to recreate life out of life! A 
wild angel had appeared to him, the angel of mortal youth and beauty, an envoy 
from the fair courts of life, to throw open before him in an instant of ecstasy 
the gates of all the ways of error and glory. On and on and on and on! 

He halted suddenly and heard his heart in the silence. Evening would deepen 
above the sea, night fall upon the plains, dawn glimmer before the wanderer and 
show him strange fields and hills and faces. Where? 

He looked northward towards Howth. The sea had fallen below the line of 
seawrack on the shallow side of the breakwater and already the tide was running 
out fast along the foreshore. Already one long oval bank of sand lay warm and 
dry amid the wavelets. Here and there warm isles of sand gleamed above the 
shallow tide and about the isles and around the long bank and amid the shallow 
currents of the beach were lightclad figures, wading and delving. 

In a few moments he was barefoot, his stockings folded in his pockets and his 
canvas shoes dangling by their knotted laces over his shoulders and, picking a 
pointed salt-eaten stick out of the jetsam among the rocks, he clambered down 
the slope of the breakwater. 

There was a long rivulet in the strand and, as he waded slowly up its course, 
he wondered at the endless drift of seaweed. Emerald and black and russet and 
olive, it moved beneath the current, swaying and turning. The water of the 
rivulet was dark with endless drift and mirrored the high-drifting clouds. The 
clouds were drifting above him silently and silently the seatangle was drifting 
below him and the grey warm air was still and a new wild life was singing in 
his veins. 

Where was his boyhood now? Where was the soul that had hung back from her 
destiny, to brood alone upon the shame of her wounds and in her house of 
squalor and subterfuge to queen it in faded cerements and in wreaths that 
withered at the touch? Or where was he? 

He was alone. He was unheeded, happy and near to the wild heart of life. He was 
alone and young and wilful and wildhearted, alone amid a waste of wild air and 
brackish waters and the sea-harvest of shells and tangle and veiled grey 
sunlight and gayclad lightclad figures of children and girls and voices 
childish and girlish in the air. 

A girl stood before him in midstream, alone and still, gazing out to sea. She 
seemed like one whom magic had changed into the likeness of a strange and 
beautiful seabird. Her long slender bare legs were delicate as a crane's and 
pure save where an emerald trail of seaweed had fashioned itself as a sign upon 
the flesh. Her thighs, fuller and soft-hued as ivory, were bared almost to the 
hips, where the white fringes of her drawers were like feathering of soft white 
down. Her slate-blue skirts were kilted boldly about her waist and dovetailed 
behind her. Her bosom was as a bird's, soft and slight, slight and soft as the 
breast of some dark-plumaged dove. But her long fair hair was girlish: and 
girlish, and touched with the wonder of mortal beauty, her face. 

She was alone and still, gazing out to sea; and when she felt his presence and 
the worship of his eyes her eyes turned to him in quiet sufferance of his gaze, 
without shame or wantonness. Long, long she suffered his gaze and then quietly 
withdrew her eyes from his and bent them towards the stream, gently stirring 
the water with her foot hither and thither. The first faint noise of gently 
moving water broke the silence, low and faint and whispering, faint as the 
bells of sleep; hither and thither, hither and thither; and a faint flame 
trembled on her cheek. 

--Heavenly God! cried Stephen's soul, in an outburst of profane joy. 

He turned away from her suddenly and set off across the strand. His cheeks were 
aflame; his body was aglow; his limbs were trembling. On and on and on and on 
he strode, far out over the sands, singing wildly to the sea, crying to greet 
the advent of the life that had cried to him. 

Her image had passed into his soul for ever and no word had broken the holy 
silence of his ecstasy. His soul was soaring in an air beyond the world and the 
body he knew was purified in a breath and delivered of incertitude and made 
radiant and commingled with the element of the spirit. An ecstasy of flight 
made radiant his eyes and wild his breath and tremulous and wild and radiant 
his windswept limbs. 

--One! Two!. . Well, and how have you been pulling along since I saw you last? 
Dear God, how old we’re getting! Do you see any signs of aging in me--eh, 
what? A little grey and thin on the top--what?” 

Ignatius Gallaher took off his hat and displayed a large closely cropped head. 
His face was heavy, pale and clean-shaven. His eyes, which were of bluish 
slate-colour, relieved his unhealthy pallor and shone out plainly above the 
vivid orange tie he wore. Between these rival features the lips appeared very 
long and shapeless and colourless. He bent his head and felt with two 
sympathetic fingers the thin hair at the crown. Little Chandler shook his head 
as a denial. Ignatius Galaher put on his hat again. 

“It pulls you down,” he said. “Press life. Always hurry and scurry, 
looking for copy and sometimes not finding it: and then, always to have 
something new in your stuff. Damn proofs and printers, I say, for a few days. 
I’m deuced glad, I can tell you, to get back to the old country. Does a 
fellow good, a bit of a holiday. I feel a ton better since I landed again in 
dear dirty Dublin. . with others. He would love his neighbour. He would love 
God who had made and loved him. He would kneel and pray with others and be 
happy. God would look down on him and on them and would love them all. It was a 
raw spring morning and his eyes were still smarting and weak. He was conscious 
of failure and of detection, of the squalor of his own mind and home, and felt 
against his neck the raw edge of his turned and jagged collar. 

A short loud laugh from Mr Tate set the class more at ease. 

--Perhaps you didn't know that, he said. 

--Where? asked Stephen. 

Mr Tate withdrew his delving hand and spread out the essay. 

--Here. It's about the Creator and the soul. Rrm. . manufacturing that 
champagne for those fellows. 

Mr Dedalus laughed loudly. 

--Is it Christy? he said. There's more cunning in one of those warts on his 
bald head than in a pack of jack foxes. 

He inclined his head, closed his eyes, and, licking his lips profusely, began 
to speak with the voice of the hotel keeper. 

--And he has such a soft mouth when he's speaking to you, don't you know. He's 
very moist and watery about the dewlaps, God bless him. 

Mr Casey was still struggling through his fit of coughing and laughter. 
Stephen, seeing and hearing the hotel keeper through his father's face and 
voice, laughed. 

Mr Dedalus put up his eyeglass and, staring down at him, said quietly and 
kindly: 

--What are you laughing at, you little puppy, you? 

The servants entered and placed the dishes on the table. Mrs Dedalus followed 
and the places were arranged. 

--Sit over, she said. 

Mr Dedalus went to the end of the table and said: 

--Now, Mrs Riordan, sit over. John, sit you down, my hearty. 

He looked round to where uncle Charles sat and said: 

--Now then, sir, there's a bird here waiting for you. Leave him to his Maker. 

--Yerra, sure I wouldn't put any ideas into his head. I'm old enough to be his 
grandfather. And I am a grandfather, said the little old man to Stephen. Do you 
know that? 

--Are you? asked Stephen. 

--Bedad I am, said the little old man. And, more than that, I can remember even 
your great-grandfather, old John Stephen Dedalus, and a fierce old fire-eater 
he was. Now, then! There's a memory for you! 

--That's three generations--four generations, said another of the company. Why, 
Johnny Cashman, you must be nearing the century. 

--Well, I'll tell you the truth, said the little old man. I'm just twenty-seven 
years of age. 

--We're as old as we feel, Johnny, said Mr Dedalus. And just finish what you 
have there and we'll have another. Here, Tim or Tom or whatever your name is, 
give us the same again here. By God, I don't feel more than eighteen myself. 
There's that son of mine there not half my age and I'm a better man than he is 
any day of the week. 

--Draw it mild now, Dedalus. I think it's time for you to take a back seat, 
said the gentleman who had spoken before. 

--No, by God! asserted Mr Dedalus. I'll sing a tenor song against him or I'll 
vault a five-barred gate against him or I'll run with him after the hounds 
across the country as I did thirty years ago along with the Kerry Boy and the 
best man for it. 

--But he'll beat you here, said the little old man, tapping his forehead and 
raising his glass to drain it. 

--Well, I hope he'll be as good a man as his father. 

--And thanks be to God, Johnny, said Mr Dedalus, that we lived so long and did 
so little harm. 

--But did so much good, Simon, said the little old man gravely. Thanks be to 
God we lived so long and did so much good. ” 

Mr Henchy returned with the candlestick and put it on the table. He sat down 
again at the fire. There was silence for a few moments. 

“Tell me, John,” said Mr O’Connor, lighting his cigarette with another 
pasteboard card. “Why should we welcome the King of England? Didn’t Parnell 
himself. . He. . No, damn it, I think he’s a stroke above that. . Thank you, 
indeed. ” 

“Are you right now?” 

“All right, thanks. . . . ?” 

“Father O’Rourke was in with him a Tuesday and anointed him and prepared 
him and all. ” 

“He knew then?” 

“He was quite resigned. ” 

“He looks quite resigned,” said my aunt. 

“That’s what the woman we had in to wash him said. She said he just looked 
as if he was asleep, he looked that peaceful and resigned. No one would think 
he’d make such a beautiful corpse. ” 

“Yes, indeed,” said my aunt. 

She sipped a little more from her glass and said: 

“Well, Miss Flynn, at any rate it must be a great comfort for you to know 
that you did all you could for him. You were both very kind to him, I must say. 
” 

Eliza smoothed her dress over her knees. 

“Ah, poor James!” she said. “God knows we done all we could, as poor as 
we are--we wouldn’t see him want anything while he was in it. ” 

Nannie had leaned her head against the sofa-pillow and seemed about to fall 
asleep. 

“There’s poor Nannie,” said Eliza, looking at her, “she’s wore out. 
All the work we had, she and me, getting in the woman to wash him and then 
laying him out and then the coffin and then arranging about the Mass in the 
chapel. Only for Father O’Rourke I don’t know what we’d have done at all. 
It was him brought us all them flowers and them two candlesticks out of the 
chapel and wrote out the notice for the _Freeman’s General_ and took charge 
of all the papers for the cemetery and poor James’s insurance. ” 

“Wasn’t that good of him?” said my aunt. 

Eliza closed her eyes and shook her head slowly. 

“Ah, there’s no friends like the old friends,” she said, “when all is 
said and done, no friends that a body can trust. ” 

“Indeed, that’s true,” said my aunt. “And I’m sure now that he’s 
gone to his eternal reward he won’t forget you and all your kindness to him. 
” 

“Ah, poor James!” said Eliza. “God knows we done all we could, as poor as 
we are--we wouldn’t see him want anything while he was in it. ” 

Nannie had leaned her head against the sofa-pillow and seemed about to fall 
asleep. 

“There’s poor Nannie,” said Eliza, looking at her, “she’s wore out. 
All the work we had, she and me, getting in the woman to wash him and then 
laying him out and then the coffin and then arranging about the Mass in the 
chapel. Only for Father O’Rourke I don’t know what we’d have done at all. 
” 

Mrs Kearney rewarded his very flat final syllable with a quick stare of 
contempt, and then said to her daughter encouragingly: 

“Are you ready, dear?” 

When she had an opportunity, she called Mr Holohan aside and asked him to tell 
her what it meant. Mr Holohan did not know what it meant. He said that the 
Committee had made a mistake in arranging for four concerts: four was too many. 

“And the _artistes_!” said Mrs Kearney. “Of course they are doing their 
best, but really they are not good. ” 

Mr Holohan admitted that the _artistes_ were no good but the Committee, he 
said, had decided to let the first three concerts go as they pleased and 
reserve all the talent for Saturday night. Mrs Kearney said nothing, but, as 
the mediocre items followed one another on the platform and the few people in 
the hall grew fewer and fewer, she began to regret that she had put herself to 
any expense for such a concert. There was something she didn’t like in the 
look of things and Mr Fitzpatrick’s vacant smile irritated her very much. 
However, she said nothing and waited to see how it would end. I saw that he had 
great gaps in his mouth between his yellow teeth. Then he asked us which of us 
had the most sweethearts. Mahony mentioned lightly that he had three totties. 
The man asked me how many had I. I answered that I had none. He did not believe 
me and said he was sure I must have one. ” 

“They’re the grandest order in the Church, Tom,” said Mr Cunningham, with 
enthusiasm. “The General of the Jesuits stands next to the Pope. Education is 
all very fine and large. . _ The evening was falling and in a few minutes they 
would be lighting the gas: then he could write. He felt that he must slake the 
thirst in his throat. He stood up from his desk and, lifting the counter as 
before, passed out of the office. As he was passing out the chief clerk looked 
at him inquiringly. 

“It’s all right, Mr Shelley,” said the man, pointing with his finger to 
indicate the objective of his journey. 

The chief clerk glanced at the hat-rack but, seeing the row complete, offered 
no remark. As soon as he was on the landing the man pulled a shepherd’s plaid 
cap out of his pocket, put it on his head and ran quickly down the rickety 
stairs. From the street door he walked on furtively on the inner side of the 
path towards the corner and all at once dived into a doorway. He was now safe 
in the dark snug of O’Neill’s shop, and filling up the little window that 
looked into the bar with his inflamed face, the colour of dark wine or dark 
meat, he called out: 

“Here, Pat, give us a g. p. ” 

“O, yes, positively,” said Little Chandler. 

“Very well, then,” said Ignatius Gallaher, “let us have another one as a 
_deoc an doruis_--that’s good vernacular for a small whisky, I believe. ” 

Little Chandler ordered the drinks. The blush which had risen to his face a few 
moments before was establishing itself. A trifle made him blush at any time: 
and now he felt warm and excited. Three small whiskies had gone to his head and 
Gallaher’s strong cigar had confused his mind, for he was a delicate and 
abstinent person. The adventure of meeting Gallaher after eight years, of 
finding himself with Gallaher in Corless’s surrounded by lights and noise, of 
listening to Gallaher’s stories and of sharing for a brief space Gallaher’s 
vagrant and triumphant life, upset the equipoise of his sensitive nature. He 
felt acutely the contrast between his own life and his friend’s and it seemed 
to him unjust. Gallaher was his inferior in birth and education. He was sure 
that he could do something better than his friend had ever done, or could ever 
do, something higher than mere tawdry journalism if he only got the chance. 
What was it that stood in his way? His unfortunate timidity! He wished to 
vindicate himself in some way, to assert his manhood. He saw behind 
Gallaher’s refusal of his invitation. Gallaher was only patronising him by 
his friendliness just as he was patronising Ireland by his visit. 

The barman brought their drinks. Little Chandler pushed one glass towards his 
friend and took up the other boldly. 

“Who knows?” he said, as they lifted their glasses. “When you come next 
year I may have the pleasure of wishing long life and happiness to Mr and Mrs 
Ignatius Gallaher. ” 

Ignatius Gallaher in the act of drinking closed one eye expressively over the 
rim of his glass. When he had drunk he smacked his lips decisively, set down 
his glass and said: 

“No blooming fear of that, my boy. I’m going to have my fling first and see 
a bit of life and the world before I put my head in the sack--if I ever do. ” 

“Some day you will,” said Little Chandler calmly. 

Ignatius Gallaher turned his orange tie and slate-blue eyes full upon his 
friend. 

“You think so?” he said. 

“O, of course, nothing wrong, you know. Only sometimes, they say, he didn’t 
preach what was quite orthodox. ” 

“Ah!. . manufacturing that champagne for those fellows. 

Mr Dedalus laughed loudly. 

--Is it Christy? he said. There's more cunning in one of those warts on his 
bald head than in a pack of jack foxes. 

He inclined his head, closed his eyes, and, licking his lips profusely, began 
to speak with the voice of the hotel keeper. 

--And he has such a soft mouth when he's speaking to you, don't you know. He's 
very moist and watery about the dewlaps, God bless him. 

Mr Casey was still struggling through his fit of coughing and laughter. 
Stephen, seeing and hearing the hotel keeper through his father's face and 
voice, laughed. 

Mr Dedalus put up his eyeglass and, staring down at him, said quietly and 
kindly: 

--What are you laughing at, you little puppy, you? 

The servants entered and placed the dishes on the table. Mrs Dedalus followed 
and the places were arranged. 

--Sit over, she said. 

Mr Dedalus went to the end of the table and said: 

--Now, Mrs Riordan, sit over. John, sit you down, my hearty. 

He looked round to where uncle Charles sat and said: 

--Now then, sir, there's a bird here waiting for you. Leave him to his Maker. 

--Yerra, sure I wouldn't put any ideas into his head. I'm old enough to be his 
grandfather. And I am a grandfather, said the little old man to Stephen. Do you 
know that? 

--Are you? asked Stephen. 

--Bedad I am, said the little old man. I have two bouncing grandchildren out at 
Sunday's Well. Now, then! What age do you think I am? And I remember seeing 
your grandfather in his red coat riding out to hounds. That was before you were 
born. I don't know what you wish to do in life. Is it what you told me the 
night we were standing outside Harcourt Street station? 

--Yes, Stephen said, smiling in spite of himself at Cranly's way of remembering 
thoughts in connexion with places. The night you spent half an hour wrangling 
with Doherty about the shortest way from Sallygap to Larras. 

--Pothead! Cranly said with calm contempt. What does he know about the way from 
Sallygap to Larras? Or what does he know about anything for that matter? And 
the big slobbering washing-pot head of him! 

He broke into a loud long laugh. 

--Well? Stephen said. Do you remember the rest? 

--What you said, is it? Cranly asked. Yes, I remember it. 

“But, of course, that doesn’t alter the contract,” she said. “The 
contract was for four concerts. ” 

Mr Holohan seemed to be in a hurry; he advised her to speak to Mr Fitzpatrick. 
Mrs Kearney was now beginning to be alarmed. She called Mr Fitzpatrick away 
from his screen and told him that her daughter had signed for four concerts and 
that, of course, according to the terms of the contract, she should receive the 
sum originally stipulated for, whether the society gave the four concerts or 
not. Mr Fitzpatrick, who did not catch the point at issue very quickly, seemed 
unable to resolve the difficulty and said that he would bring the matter before 
the Committee. Mrs Kearney’s anger began to flutter in her cheek and she had 
all she could do to keep from asking: 

“And who is the _Cometty_ pray?” 

But she knew that it would not be ladylike to do that: so she was silent. 

Little boys were sent out into the principal streets of Dublin early on Friday 
morning with bundles of handbills. Special puffs appeared in all the evening 
papers, reminding the music-loving public of the treat which was in store for 
it on the following evening. Mrs Kearney was somewhat reassured, but she 
thought well to tell her husband part of her suspicions. He listened carefully 
and said that perhaps it would be better if he went with her on Saturday night. 
She agreed. She respected her husband in the same way as she respected the 
General Post Office, as something large, secure and fixed; and though she knew 
the small number of his talents she appreciated his abstract value as a male. 
She was glad that he had suggested coming with her. So then they got the keys 
and opened the chapel and the clerk and Father O’Rourke and another priest 
that was there brought in a light for to look for him. . I couldn’t. The 
wailing of the child pierced the drum of his ear. It was useless, useless! He 
was a prisoner for life. His arms trembled with anger and suddenly bending to 
the child’s face he shouted: 

“Stop!” 

The child stopped for an instant, had a spasm of fright and began to scream. He 
jumped up from his chair and walked hastily up and down the room with the child 
in his arms. The others, taken aback by his rude speech, could find nothing to 
say. Aunt Kate wrinkled her brows and made signs to the others to drop the 
subject. Mr D’Arcy stood swathing his neck carefully and frowning. 

“It’s the weather,” said Aunt Julia, after a pause. 

“Yes, everybody has colds,” said Aunt Kate readily, “everybody. ” 

“They say,” said Mary Jane, “we haven’t had snow like it for thirty 
years; and I read this morning in the newspapers that the snow is general all 
over Ireland. ” 

“I love the look of snow,” said Aunt Julia sadly. 

“So do I,” said Miss O’Callaghan. “I think Christmas is never really 
Christmas unless we have the snow on the ground. ” 

“But poor Mr D’Arcy doesn’t like the snow,” said Aunt Kate, smiling. 

Mr D’Arcy came from the pantry, fully swathed and buttoned, and in a 
repentant tone told them the history of his cold. Everyone gave him advice and 
said it was a great pity and urged him to be very careful of his throat in the 
night air. She was invariably friendly and advising--homely, in fact. She 
pushed the decanter towards him, saying: 

“Now, help yourself, Mr Holohan!” 

And while he was helping himself she said: 

“Don’t be afraid! Don’t be afraid of it!” 

Everything went on smoothly. Mrs Kearney bought some lovely blush-pink 
charmeuse in Brown Thomas’s to let into the front of Kathleen’s dress. It 
cost a pretty penny; but there are occasions when a little expense is 
justifiable. She took a dozen of two-shilling tickets for the final concert and 
sent them to those friends who could not be trusted to come otherwise. She 
forgot nothing and, thanks to her, everything that was to be done was done. It 
would be a splendid bazaar, she said; she would love to go. 

“And why can’t you?” I asked. 

“Seventeen,” said the boy. 

As the old man said nothing further, the boy took the bottle and said: 
“Here’s my best respects, sir,” to Mr Henchy, drank the contents, put the 
bottle back on the table and wiped his mouth with his sleeve. Then he took up 
the corkscrew and went out of the door sideways, muttering some form of 
salutation. 

“That’s the way it begins,” said the old man. 

“The thin edge of the wedge,” said Mr Henchy. 

The old man distributed the three bottles which he had opened and the men drank 
from them simultaneously. After having drunk each placed his bottle on the 
mantelpiece within hand’s reach and drew in a long breath of satisfaction. 

“Well, I did a good day’s work today,” said Mr Henchy, after a pause. 

“That so, John?” 

“Yes. I got him one or two sure things in Dawson Street, Crofton and myself. 
Between ourselves, you know, Crofton (he’s a decent chap, of course), but 
he’s not worth a damn as a canvasser. He hasn’t a word to throw to a dog. 
He stands and looks at the people while I do the talking. ” 

“There’s no mistake about it,” said Mr M’Coy, “if you want a thing 
well done and no flies about it you go to a Jesuit. They’re the boyos have 
influence. I’ll tell you a case in point. . . . there was something uncanny 
about him. I’ll tell you my opinion. . . . I’ll say a _Hail Mary_ for you. 
. . . . . and thought how strange it was that the last three words began with 
the same letter. The chief clerk began to hurry Miss Parker, saying she would 
never have the letters typed in time for post. The man listened to the clicking 
of the machine for a few minutes and then set to work to finish his copy. But 
his head was not clear and his mind wandered away to the glare and rattle of 
the public-house. It was a night for hot punches. He struggled on with his 
copy, but when the clock struck five he had still fourteen pages to write. 
Blast it! He couldn’t finish it in time. He longed to execrate aloud, to 
bring his fist down on something violently. He was so enraged that he wrote 
_Bernard Bernard_ instead of _Bernard Bodley_ and had to begin again on a clean 
sheet. 

He felt strong enough to clear out the whole office singlehanded. His body 
ached to do something, to rush out and revel in violence. All the indignities 
of his life enraged him. . Ah! EVER REACHING. That's heresy. 

Stephen murmured: 

--I meant WITHOUT A POSSIBILITY OF EVER REACHING. 

It was a submission and Mr Tate, appeased, folded up the essay and passed it 
across to him, saying: 

--O. . . . . . . . Am I right, Jack?” 

“That’s my principle, too,” said my uncle. “Let him learn to box his 
corner. That’s what I’m always saying to that Rosicrucian there: take 
exercise. Why, when I was a nipper every morning of my life I had a cold bath, 
winter and summer. And that’s what stands to me now. Education is all very 
fine and large. . Ao! 

--Good man, Towser! Duck him! 

--Come along, Dedalus! Bous Stephanoumenos! Bous Stephaneforos! 

--Duck him! Guzzle him now, Towser! 

--Help! Help!. . ” 

“The Jesuits are a fine body of men,” said Mr Power. 

“It’s a curious thing,” said Mr Cunningham, “about the Jesuit Order. 
Every other order of the Church had to be reformed at some time or other but 
the Jesuit Order was never once reformed. It never fell away. 

--And then the voice of God was heard in that garden, calling His creature man 
to account: and Michael, prince of the heavenly host, with a sword of flame in 
his hand, appeared before the guilty pair and drove them forth from Eden into 
the world, the world of sickness and striving, of cruelty and disappointment, 
of labour and hardship, to earn their bread in the sweat of their brow. But 
even then how merciful was God! He took pity on our poor degraded parents and 
promised that in the fullness of time He would send down from heaven One who 
would redeem them, make them once more children of God and heirs to the kingdom 
of heaven: and that One, that Redeemer of fallen man, was to be God's only 
begotten Son, the Second Person of the Most Blessed Trinity, the Eternal Word. 

--He came. He was born of a virgin pure, Mary the virgin mother. He was born in 
a poor cowhouse in Judea and lived as a humble carpenter for thirty years until 
the hour of His mission had come. And then, filled with love for men, He went 
forth and called to men to hear the new gospel. 

--Did they listen? Yes, they listened but would not hear. He was seized and 
bound like a common criminal, mocked at as a fool, set aside to give place to a 
public robber, scourged with five thousand lashes, crowned with a crown of 
thorns, hustled through the streets by the jewish rabble and the Roman 
soldiery, stripped of his garments and hanged upon a gibbet and His side was 
pierced with a lance and from the wounded body of our Lord water and blood 
issued continually. 

--Yet even then, in that hour of supreme agony, Our Merciful Redeemer had pity 
for mankind. Yet even there, on the hill of Calvary, He founded the holy 
catholic church against which, it is promised, the gates of hell shall not 
prevail. He founded it upon the rock of ages, and endowed it with His grace, 
with sacraments and sacrifice, and promised that if men would obey the word of 
His church they would still enter into eternal life; but if, after all that had 
been done for them, they still persisted in their wickedness, there remained 
for them an eternity of torment: hell. 

The preacher's voice sank. He paused, joined his palms for an instant, parted 
them. Then he resumed: 

--Now let us try for a moment to realize, as far as we can, the nature of that 
abode of the damned which the justice of an offended God has called into 
existence for the eternal punishment of sinners. Hell is a strait and dark and 
foul-smelling prison, an abode of demons and lost souls, filled with fire and 
smoke. The straitness of this prison house is expressly designed by God to 
punish those who refused to be bound by His laws. In earthly prisons the poor 
captive has at least some liberty of movement, were it only within the four 
walls of his cell or in the gloomy yard of his prison. Not so in hell. There, 
by reason of the great number of the damned, the prisoners are heaped together 
in their awful prison, the walls of which are said to be four thousand miles 
thick: and the damned are so utterly bound and helpless that, as a blessed 
saint, saint Anselm, writes in his book on similitudes, they are not even able 
to remove from the eye a worm that gnaws it. 

--They lie in exterior darkness. For, remember, the fire of hell gives forth no 
light. As, at the command of God, the fire of the Babylonian furnace lost its 
heat but not its light, so, at the command of God, the fire of hell, while 
retaining the intensity of its heat, burns eternally in darkness. It is a never 
ending storm of darkness, dark flames and dark smoke of burning brimstone, amid 
which the bodies are heaped one upon another without even a glimpse of air. Of 
all the plagues with which the land of the Pharaohs were smitten one plague 
alone, that of darkness, was called horrible. What name, then, shall we give to 
the darkness of hell which is to last not for three days alone but for all 
eternity? 

--The horror of this strait and dark prison is increased by its awful stench. 
All the filth of the world, all the offal and scum of the world, we are told, 
shall run there as to a vast reeking sewer when the terrible conflagration of 
the last day has purged the world. The brimstone, too, which burns there in 
such prodigious quantity fills all hell with its intolerable stench; and the 
bodies of the damned themselves exhale such a pestilential odour that, as saint 
Bonaventure says, one of them alone would suffice to infect the whole world. 
The very air of this world, that pure element, becomes foul and unbreathable 
when it has been long enclosed. Consider then what must be the foulness of the 
air of hell. Imagine some foul and putrid corpse that has lain rotting and 
decomposing in the grave, a jelly-like mass of liquid corruption. Imagine such 
a corpse a prey to flames, devoured by the fire of burning brimstone and giving 
off dense choking fumes of nauseous loathsome decomposition. And then imagine 
this sickening stench, multiplied a millionfold and a millionfold again from 
the millions upon millions of fetid carcasses massed together in the reeking 
darkness, a huge and rotting human fungus. Imagine all this, and you will have 
some idea of the horror of the stench of hell. 

--But this stench is not, horrible though it is, the greatest physical torment 
to which the damned are subjected. The torment of fire is the greatest torment 
to which the tyrant has ever subjected his fellow creatures. Place your finger 
for a moment in the flame of a candle and you will feel the pain of fire. But 
our earthly fire was created by God for the benefit of man, to maintain in him 
the spark of life and to help him in the useful arts, whereas the fire of hell 
is of another quality and was created by God to torture and punish the 
unrepentant sinner. Our earthly fire also consumes more or less rapidly 
according as the object which it attacks is more or less combustible, so that 
human ingenuity has even succeeded in inventing chemical preparations to check 
or frustrate its action. But the sulphurous brimstone which burns in hell is a 
substance which is specially designed to burn for ever and for ever with 
unspeakable fury. Moreover, our earthly fire destroys at the same time as it 
burns, so that the more intense it is the shorter is its duration; but the fire 
of hell has this property, that it preserves that which it burns, and, though 
it rages with incredible intensity, it rages for ever. 

--Our earthly fire again, no matter how fierce or widespread it may be, is 
always of a limited extent; but the lake of fire in hell is boundless, 
shoreless and bottomless. It is on record that the devil himself, when asked 
the question by a certain soldier, was obliged to confess that if a whole 
mountain were thrown into the burning ocean of hell it would be burned up in an 
instant like a piece of wax. And this terrible fire will not afflict the bodies 
of the damned only from without, but each lost soul will be a hell unto itself, 
the boundless fire raging in its very vitals. O, how terrible is the lot of 
those wretched beings! The blood seethes and boils in the veins, the brains are 
boiling in the skull, the heart in the breast glowing and bursting, the bowels 
a red-hot mass of burning pulp, the tender eyes flaming like molten balls. 

--And yet what I have said as to the strength and quality and boundlessness of 
this fire is as nothing when compared to its intensity, an intensity which it 
has as being the instrument chosen by divine design for the punishment of soul 
and body alike. It is a fire which proceeds directly from the ire of God, 
working not of its own activity but as an instrument of Divine vengeance. As 
the waters of baptism cleanse the soul with the body, so do the fires of 
punishment torture the spirit with the flesh. Every sense of the flesh is 
tortured and every faculty of the soul therewith: the eyes with impenetrable 
utter darkness, the nose with noisome odours, the ears with yells and howls and 
execrations, the taste with foul matter, leprous corruption, nameless 
suffocating filth, the touch with redhot goads and spikes, with cruel tongues 
of flame. And through the several torments of the senses the immortal soul is 
tortured eternally in its very essence amid the leagues upon leagues of glowing 
fires kindled in the abyss by the offended majesty of the Omnipotent God and 
fanned into everlasting and ever-increasing fury by the breath of the anger of 
the God-head. 

--Consider finally that the torment of this infernal prison is increased by the 
company of the damned themselves. Evil company on earth is so noxious that the 
plants, as if by instinct, withdraw from the company of whatsoever is deadly or 
hurtful to them. In hell all laws are overturned--there is no thought of family 
or country, of ties, of relationships. The damned howl and scream at one 
another, their torture and rage intensified by the presence of beings tortured 
and raging like themselves. All sense of humanity is forgotten. The yells of 
the suffering sinners fill the remotest corners of the vast abyss. The mouths 
of the damned are full of blasphemies against God and of hatred for their 
fellow sufferers and of curses against those souls which were their accomplices 
in sin. In olden times it was the custom to punish the parricide, the man who 
had raised his murderous hand against his father, by casting him into the 
depths of the sea in a sack in which were placed a cock, a monkey, and a 
serpent. The intention of those law-givers who framed such a law, which seems 
cruel in our times, was to punish the criminal by the company of hurtful and 
hateful beasts. But what is the fury of those dumb beasts compared with the 
fury of execration which bursts from the parched lips and aching throats of the 
damned in hell when they behold in their companions in misery those who aided 
and abetted them in sin, those whose words sowed the first seeds of evil 
thinking and evil living in their minds, those whose immodest suggestions led 
them on to sin, those whose eyes tempted and allured them from the path of 
virtue. They turn upon those accomplices and upbraid them and curse them. But 
they are helpless and hopeless: it is too late now for repentance. 

--Last of all consider the frightful torment to those damned souls, tempters 
and tempted alike, of the company of the devils. These devils will afflict the 
damned in two ways, by their presence and by their reproaches. We can have no 
idea of how horrible these devils are. Saint Catherine of Siena once saw a 
devil and she has written that, rather than look again for one single instant 
on such a frightful monster, she would prefer to walk until the end of her life 
along a track of red coals. These devils, who were once beautiful angels, have 
become as hideous and ugly as they once were beautiful. They mock and jeer at 
the lost souls whom they dragged down to ruin. It is they, the foul demons, who 
are made in hell the voices of conscience. Why did you sin? Why did you lend an 
ear to the temptings of friends? Why did you turn aside from your pious 
practices and good works? Why did you not shun the occasions of sin? Why did 
you not leave that evil companion? Why did you not give up that lewd habit, 
that impure habit? Why did you not listen to the counsels of your confessor? 
Why did you not, even after you had fallen the first or the second or the third 
or the fourth or the hundredth time, repent of your evil ways and turn to God 
who only waited for your repentance to absolve you of your sins? Now the time 
for repentance has gone by. Time is, time was, but time shall be no more! Time 
was to sin in secrecy, to indulge in that sloth and pride, to covet the 
unlawful, to yield to the promptings of your lower nature, to live like the 
beasts of the field, nay worse than the beasts of the field, for they, at 
least, are but brutes and have no reason to guide them: time was, but time 
shall be no more. God spoke to you by so many voices, but you would not hear. 
You would not crush out that pride and anger in your heart, you would not 
restore those ill-gotten goods, you would not obey the precepts of your holy 
church nor attend to your religious duties, you would not abandon those wicked 
companions, you would not avoid those dangerous temptations. Such is the 
language of those fiendish tormentors, words of taunting and of reproach, of 
hatred and of disgust. Of disgust, yes! For even they, the very devils, when 
they sinned, sinned by such a sin as alone was compatible with such angelical 
natures, a rebellion of the intellect: and they, even they, the foul devils 
must turn away, revolted and disgusted, from the contemplation of those 
unspeakable sins by which degraded man outrages and defiles the temple of the 
Holy Ghost, defiles and pollutes himself. 

--O, my dear little brothers in Christ, may it never be our lot to hear that 
language! May it never be our lot, I say! In the last day of terrible reckoning 
I pray fervently to God that not a single soul of those who are in this chapel 
today may be found among those miserable beings whom the Great Judge shall 
command to depart for ever from His sight, that not one of us may ever hear 
ringing in his ears the awful sentence of rejection: DEPART FROM ME, YE CURSED, 
INTO EVERLASTING FIRE WHICH WAS PREPARED FOR THE DEVIL AND HIS ANGELS! 

He came down the aisle of the chapel, his legs shaking and the scalp of his 
head trembling as though it had been touched by ghostly fingers. He passed up 
the staircase and into the corridor along the walls of which the overcoats and 
waterproofs hung like gibbeted malefactors, headless and dripping and 
shapeless. And at every step he feared that he had already died, that his soul 
had been wrenched forth of the sheath of his body, that he was plunging 
headlong through space. 

He could not grip the floor with his feet and sat heavily at his desk, opening 
one of his books at random and poring over it. Every word for him. Upon my word 
I must. Upon my word I must. It was true. Told him the shortest way to Tara was 
VIA Holyhead. Just then my father came up. He might have answered rudely. 

A wave of yet more tender joy escaped from his heart and went coursing in warm 
flood along his arteries. Like the tender fire of stars moments of their life 
together, that no one knew of or would ever know of, broke upon and illumined 
his memory. He longed to recall to her those moments, to make her forget the 
years of their dull existence together and remember only their moments of 
ecstasy. For the years, he felt, had not quenched his soul or hers. Their 
children, his writing, her household cares had not quenched all their souls’ 
tender fire. In one letter that he had written to her then he had said: “Why 
is it that words like these seem to me so dull and cold? Is it because there is 
no word tender enough to be your name?” 

Like distant music these words that he had written years before were borne 
towards him from the past. He longed to be alone with her. When the others had 
gone away, when he and she were in their room in the hotel, then they would be 
alone together. He would call her softly: 

“Gretta!” 

Perhaps she would not hear at once: she would be undressing. Then something in 
his voice would strike her. He turned suddenly to the invalid and said: 

“D’ye know what, Tom, has just occurred to me? You night join in and we’d 
have a four-handed reel. ” 

“Good idea,” said Mr Power. “The four of us together. ” 

Mr Kernan was silent. The old man began to rake more cinders together. He had a 
long back like the long back of a tramhorse. He shook the poker gravely and 
nodded his head at the fellow out of third of grammar. 

Then Brother Michael went away and after a while the fellow out of third of 
grammar turned in towards the wall and fell asleep. 

That was the infirmary. 

Your fond son, Stephen 



How far away they were! There was cold sunlight outside the window. He wondered 
if he would die. Then he would have a dead mass in the chapel like the way the 
fellows had told him it was when Little had died. All the fellows would be at 
the mass, dressed in black, all with sad faces. Wells too would be there but no 
fellow would look at him. The rector would be there in a cope of black and gold 
and there would be tall yellow candles on the altar and round the catafalque. 
And they would carry the coffin out of the chapel slowly and he would be buried 
in the little graveyard of the community off the main avenue of limes. And 
Wells would be sorry then for what he had done. And the bell would toll slowly. 

He could hear the tolling. He said over to himself the song that Brigid had 
taught him. 



Dingdong! The castle bell! Farewell, my mother! Bury me in the old churchyard 
Beside my eldest brother. My coffin shall be black, Six angels at my back, Two 
to sing and two to pray And two to carry my soul away. 



How beautiful and sad that was! How beautiful the words were where they said 
BURY ME IN THE OLD CHURCHYARD! A tremor passed over his body. How sad and how 
beautiful! He wanted to cry quietly but not for himself: for the words, so 
beautiful and sad, like music. The bell! The bell! Farewell! O farewell! 

The cold sunlight was weaker and Brother Michael was standing at his bedside 
with a bowl of beef-tea. He was glad for his mouth was hot and dry. He could 
hear them playing in the playgrounds. He broke into a run and, running quicker 
and quicker, ran across the cinderpath and reached the third line playground, 
panting. 

The fellows had seen him running. Perhaps she had felt the impetuous desire 
that was in him, and then the yielding mood had come upon her. Now that she had 
fallen to him so easily, he wondered why he had been so diffident. 

He stood, holding her head between his hands. Then, slipping one arm swiftly 
about her body and drawing her towards him, he said softly: 

“Gretta, dear, what are you thinking about?” 

She did not answer nor yield wholly to his arm. He said again, softly: 

“Tell me what it is, Gretta. I think I know what is the matter. Do I know?” 

She did not answer at once. Then she said in an outburst of tears: 

“O, I am thinking about that song, _The Lass of Aughrim_. ” 

She broke loose from him and ran to the bed and, throwing her arms across the 
bed-rail, hid her face. Gabriel stood stock-still for a moment in astonishment 
and then followed her. As he passed in the way of the cheval-glass he caught 
sight of himself in full length, his broad, well-filled shirt-front, the face 
whose expression always puzzled him when he saw it in a mirror and his 
glimmering gilt-rimmed eyeglasses. He halted a few paces from her and said: 

“What about the song? Why does that make you cry?” 

She raised her head from her arms and dried her eyes with the back of her hand 
like a child. A kinder note than he had intended went into his voice. 

“Why, Gretta?” he asked. A few steps behind her were Mr Bartell D’Arcy 
and Miss O’Callaghan. ” 

“Good-night, Miss Morkan. ” 

“Good-night, again. ” 

“Good-night, all. ” 





Mrs Kernan’s puzzled eyes watched the car till it was out of sight. What do I 
see? A decollated percursor trying to pick the lock. 

MARCH 21, NIGHT. Free. 

--O by the way, said Heron suddenly, I saw your governor going in. 

The smile waned on Stephen's face. Any allusion made to his father by a fellow 
or by a master put his calm to rout in a moment. He waited in timorous silence 
to hear what Heron might say next. Heron, however, nudged him expressively with 
his elbow and said: 

--You're a sly dog. 

--Why so? said Stephen. 

--I like it, said Stephen. 

--It's a pretty old air, said Mr Dedalus, twirling the points of his moustache. 
Ah, but you should have heard Mick Lacy sing it! Poor Mick Lacy! He had little 
turns for it, grace notes that he used to put in that I haven't got. That was 
the boy who could sing a COME-ALL-YOU, if you like. 

Mr Dedalus had ordered drisheens for breakfast and during the meal he 
cross-examined the waiter for local news. For the most part they spoke at cross 
purposes when a name was mentioned, the waiter having in mind the present 
holder and Mr Dedalus his father or perhaps his grandfather. 

--Well, I hope they haven't moved the Queen's College anyhow, said Mr Dedalus, 
for I want to show it to this youngster of mine. 

Along the Mardyke the trees were in bloom. They entered the grounds of the 
college and were led by the garrulous porter across the quadrangle. But their 
progress across the gravel was brought to a halt after every dozen or so paces 
by some reply of the porter's. 

--Ah, do you tell me so? And is poor Pottlebelly dead? 

--Yes, sir. Dead, sir. 

During these halts Stephen stood awkwardly behind the two men, weary of the 
subject and waiting restlessly for the slow march to begin again. By the time 
they had crossed the quadrangle his restlessness had risen to fever. He 
wondered how his father, whom he knew for a shrewd suspicious man, could be 
duped by the servile manners of the porter; and the lively southern speech 
which had entertained him all the morning now irritated his ears. 

They passed into the anatomy theatre where Mr Dedalus, the porter aiding him, 
searched the desks for his initials. Stephen remained in the background, 
depressed more than ever by the darkness and silence of the theatre and by the 
air it wore of jaded and formal study. On the desk he read the word FOETUS cut 
several times in the dark stained wood. The sudden legend startled his blood: 
he seemed to feel the absent students of the college about him and to shrink 
from their company. A vision of their life, which his father's words had been 
powerless to evoke, sprang up before him out of the word cut in the desk. A 
broad-shouldered student with a moustache was cutting in the letters with a 
jack-knife, seriously. Other students stood or sat near him laughing at his 
handiwork. One jogged his elbow. The big student turned on him, frowning. He 
was dressed in loose grey clothes and had tan boots. 

Stephen's name was called. He hurried down the steps of the theatre so as to be 
as far away from the vision as he could be and, peering closely at his father's 
initials, hid his flushed face. 

But the word and the vision capered before his eyes as he walked back across 
the quadrangle and towards the college gate. It shocked him to find in the 
outer world a trace of what he had deemed till then a brutish and individual 
malady of his own mind. His monstrous reveries came thronging into his memory. 
They too had sprung up before him, suddenly and furiously, out of mere words. 
He had soon given in to them and allowed them to sweep across and abase his 
intellect, wondering always where they came from, from what den of monstrous 
images, and always weak and humble towards others, restless and sickened of 
himself when they had swept over him. 

--Ay, bedad! And there's the Groceries sure enough! cried Mr Dedalus. You often 
heard me speak of the Groceries, didn't you, Stephen. Many's the time we went 
down there when our names had been marked, a crowd of us, Harry Peard and 
little Jack Mountain and Bob Dyas and Maurice Moriarty, the Frenchman, and Tom 
O'Grady and Mick Lacy that I told you of this morning and Joey Corbet and poor 
little good-hearted Johnny Keevers of the Tantiles. 

The leaves of the trees along the Mardyke were astir and whispering in the 
sunlight. A team of cricketers passed, agile young men in flannels and blazers, 
one of them carrying the long green wicket-bag. In a quiet bystreet a German 
band of five players in faded uniforms and with battered brass instruments was 
playing to an audience of street arabs and leisurely messenger boys. A maid in 
a white cap and apron was watering a box of plants on a sill which shone like a 
slab of limestone in the warm glare. From another window open to the air came 
the sound of a piano, scale after scale rising into the treble. 

Stephen walked on at his father's side, listening to stories he had heard 
before, hearing again the names of the scattered and dead revellers who had 
been the companions of his father's youth. And a faint sickness sighed in his 
heart. 

He recalled his own equivocal position in Belvedere, a free boy, a leader 
afraid of his own authority, proud and sensitive and suspicious, battling 
against the squalor of his life and against the riot of his mind. The letters 
cut in the stained wood of the desk stared upon him, mocking his bodily 
weakness and futile enthusiasms and making him loathe himself for his own mad 
and filthy orgies. The spittle in his throat grew bitter and foul to swallow 
and the faint sickness climbed to his brain so that for a moment he closed his 
eyes and walked on in darkness. 

He could still hear his father's voice-- 

--When you kick out for yourself, Stephen--as I daresay you will one of these 
days--remember, whatever you do, to mix with gentlemen. When I was a young 
fellow I tell you I enjoyed myself. But we were all gentlemen, Stephen--at 
least I hope we were--and bloody good honest Irishmen too. That's the kind of 
fellows I want you to associate with, fellows of the right kidney. I'm talking 
to you as a friend, Stephen. I don't believe a son should be afraid of his 
father. 

--Behave yourself! cried Heron, cutting at Stephen's legs with his cane. 

It was the signal for their onset. Nash pinioned his arms behind while Boland 
seized a long cabbage stump which was lying in the gutter. Struggling and 
kicking under the cuts of the cane and the blows of the knotty stump Stephen 
was borne back against a barbed wire fence. 

--Admit that Byron was no good. 

--No. No. 

At last after a fury of plunges he wrenched himself free. His tormentors set 
off towards Jones's Road, laughing and jeering at him, while he, half blinded 
with tears, stumbled on, clenching his fists madly and sobbing. 

While he was still repeating the CONFITEOR amid the indulgent laughter of his 
hearers and while the scenes of that malignant episode were still passing 
sharply and swiftly before his mind he wondered why he bore no malice now to 
those who had tormented him. He had not forgotten a whit of their cowardice and 
cruelty but the memory of it called forth no anger from him. All the 
descriptions of fierce love and hatred which he had met in books had seemed to 
him therefore unreal. Even that night as he stumbled homewards along Jones's 
Road he had felt that some power was divesting him of that sudden-woven anger 
as easily as a fruit is divested of its soft ripe peel. 

He remained standing with his two companions at the end of the shed listening 
idly to their talk or to the bursts of applause in the theatre. She was sitting 
there among the others perhaps waiting for him to appear. He tried to recall 
her appearance but could not. He could remember only that she had worn a shawl 
about her head like a cowl and that her dark eyes had invited and unnerved him. 
He wondered had he been in her thoughts as she had been in his. Then in the 
dark and unseen by the other two he rested the tips of the fingers of one hand 
upon the palm of the other hand, scarcely touching it lightly. But the pressure 
of her fingers had been lighter and steadier: and suddenly the memory of their 
touch traversed his brain and body like an invisible wave. 

A boy came towards them, running along under the shed. He was excited and 
breathless. 

--O, Dedalus, he cried, Doyle is in a great bake about you. 

--Will you tell Doyle with my best compliments that I damned his eyes? answered 
Heron. 

--Well, I must go now, said Stephen, who cared little for such points of 
honour. 

--I wouldn't, said Heron, damn me if I would. That's no way to send for one of 
the senior boys. In a bake, indeed! I think it's quite enough that you're 
taking a part in his bally old play. 

This spirit of quarrelsome comradeship which he had observed lately in his 
rival had not seduced Stephen from his habits of quiet obedience. He mistrusted 
the turbulence and doubted the sincerity of such comradeship which seemed to 
him a sorry anticipation of manhood. The question of honour here raised was, 
like all such questions, trivial to him. While his mind had been pursuing its 
intangible phantoms and turning in irresolution from such pursuit he had heard 
about him the constant voices of his father and of his masters, urging him to 
be a gentleman above all things and urging him to be a good catholic above all 
things. These voices had now come to be hollow-sounding in his ears. He gave 
them ear only for a time but he was happy only when he was far from them, 
beyond their call, alone or in the company of phantasmal comrades. 

In the vestry a plump fresh-faced jesuit and an elderly man, in shabby blue 
clothes, were dabbling in a case of paints and chalks. The boys who had been 
painted walked about or stood still awkwardly, touching their faces in a 
gingerly fashion with their furtive fingertips. In the middle of the vestry a 
young jesuit, who was then on a visit to the college, stood rocking himself 
rhythmically from the tips of his toes to his heels and back again, his hands 
thrust well forward into his side-pockets. His small head set off with glossy 
red curls and his newly shaven face agreed well with the spotless decency of 
his soutane and with his spotless shoes. 

As he watched this swaying form and tried to read for himself the legend of the 
priest's mocking smile there came into Stephen's memory a saying which he had 
heard from his father before he had been sent to Clongowes, that you could 
always tell a jesuit by the style of his clothes. At the same moment he thought 
he saw a likeness between his father's mind and that of this smiling 
well-dressed priest: and he was aware of some desecration of the priest's 
office or of the vestry itself whose silence was now routed by loud talk and 
joking and its air pungent with the smells of the gas-jets and the grease. 

While his forehead was being wrinkled and his jaws painted black and blue by 
the elderly man, he listened distractedly to the voice of the plump young 
jesuit which bade him speak up and make his points clearly. He could hear the 
band playing THE LILY OF KILLARNEY and knew that in a few moments the curtain 
would go up. He felt no stage fright but the thought of the part he had to play 
humiliated him. A remembrance of some of his lines made a sudden flush rise to 
his painted cheeks. He saw her serious alluring eyes watching him from among 
the audience and their image at once swept away his scruples, leaving his will 
compact. Another nature seemed to have been lent him: the infection of the 
excitement and youth about him entered into and transformed his moody 
mistrustfulness. For one rare moment he seemed to be clothed in the real 
apparel of boyhood: and, as he stood in the wings among the other players, he 
shared the common mirth amid which the drop scene was hauled upwards by two 
able-bodied priests with violent jerks and all awry. 

A few moments after he found himself on the stage amid the garish gas and the 
dim scenery, acting before the innumerable faces of the void. It surprised him 
to see that the play which he had known at rehearsals for a disjointed lifeless 
thing had suddenly assumed a life of its own. It seemed now to play itself, he 
and his fellow actors aiding it with their parts. When the curtain fell on the 
last scene he heard the void filled with applause and, through a rift in a side 
scene, saw the simple body before which he had acted magically deformed, the 
void of faces breaking at all points and falling asunder into busy groups. 

He left the stage quickly and rid himself of his mummery and passed out through 
the chapel into the college garden. Now that the play was over his nerves cried 
for some further adventure. He hurried onwards as if to overtake it. The doors 
of the theatre were all open and the audience had emptied out. On the lines 
which he had fancied the moorings of an ark a few lanterns swung in the night 
breeze, flickering cheerlessly. He mounted the steps from the garden in haste, 
eager that some prey should not elude him, and forced his way through the crowd 
in the hall and past the two jesuits who stood watching the exodus and bowing 
and shaking hands with the visitors. He pushed onward nervously, feigning a 
still greater haste and faintly conscious of the smiles and stares and nudges 
which his powdered head left in its wake. 

When he came out on the steps he saw his family waiting for him at the first 
lamp. In a glance he noted that every figure of the group was familiar and ran 
down the steps angrily. 

--I have to leave a message down in George's Street, he said to his father 
quickly. I'll be home after you. 

Without waiting for his father's questions he ran across the road and began to 
walk at breakneck speed down the hill. He hardly knew where he was walking. 

“What is the matter, Julia?” asked Aunt Kate anxiously. “Who is it?” 

Julia, who was carrying in a column of table-napkins, turned to her sister and 
said, simply, as if the question had surprised her: 

“It’s only Freddy, Kate, and Gabriel with him. ” 

In fact right behind her Gabriel could be seen piloting Freddy Malins across 
the landing. The latter, a young man of about forty, was of Gabriel’s size 
and build, with very round shoulders. His face was fleshy and pallid, touched 
with colour only at the thick hanging lobes of his ears and at the wide wings 
of his nose. He had coarse features, a blunt nose, a convex and receding brow, 
tumid and protruded lips. His heavy-lidded eyes and the disorder of his scanty 
hair made him look sleepy. He was laughing heartily in a high key at a story 
which he had been telling Gabriel on the stairs and at the same time rubbing 
the knuckles of his left fist backwards and forwards into his left eye. 

“Good-evening, Freddy,” said Aunt Julia. 

Freddy Malins bade the Misses Morkan good-evening in what seemed an offhand 
fashion by reason of the habitual catch in his voice and then, seeing that Mr 
Browne was grinning at him from the sideboard, crossed the room on rather shaky 
legs and began to repeat in an undertone the story he had just told to Gabriel. 

“He’s not so bad, is he?” said Aunt Kate to Gabriel. 

Gabriel’s brows were dark but he raised them quickly and answered: 

“O, no, hardly noticeable. ” 

“Now, isn’t he a terrible fellow!” she said. “And his poor mother made 
him take the pledge on New Year’s Eve. But come on, Gabriel, into the 
drawing-room. ” 

Before leaving the room with Gabriel she signalled to Mr Browne by frowning and 
shaking her forefinger in warning to and fro. Mr Browne nodded in answer and, 
when she had gone, said to Freddy Malins: 

“Now, then, Teddy, I’m going to fill you out a good glass of lemonade just 
to buck you up. ” 

Freddy Malins, who was nearing the climax of his story, waved the offer aside 
impatiently but Mr Browne, having first called Freddy Malins’ attention to a 
disarray in his dress, filled out and handed him a full glass of lemonade. 
Freddy Malins’ left hand accepted the glass mechanically, his right hand 
being engaged in the mechanical readjustment of his dress. Mr Browne, whose 
face was once more wrinkling with mirth, poured out for himself a glass of 
whisky while Freddy Malins exploded, before he had well reached the climax of 
his story, in a kink of high-pitched bronchitic laughter and, setting down his 
untasted and overflowing glass, began to rub the knuckles of his left fist 
backwards and forwards into his left eye, repeating words of his last phrase as 
well as his fit of laughter would allow him. 





Gabriel could not listen while Mary Jane was playing her Academy piece, full of 
runs and difficult passages, to the hushed drawing-room. He liked music but the 
piece she was playing had no melody for him and he doubted whether it had any 
melody for the other listeners, though they had begged Mary Jane to play 
something. Four young men, who had come from the refreshment-room to stand in 
the doorway at the sound of the piano, had gone away quietly in couples after a 
few minutes. The only persons who seemed to follow the music were Mary Jane 
herself, her hands racing along the key-board or lifted from it at the pauses 
like those of a priestess in momentary imprecation, and Aunt Kate standing at 
her elbow to turn the page. 

Gabriel’s eyes, irritated by the floor, which glittered with beeswax under 
the heavy chandelier, wandered to the wall above the piano. A picture of the 
balcony scene in _Romeo and Juliet_ hung there and beside it was a picture of 
the two murdered princes in the Tower which Aunt Julia had worked in red, blue 
and brown wools when she was a girl. Probably in the school they had gone to as 
girls that kind of work had been taught for one year. His mother had worked for 
him as a birthday present a waistcoat of purple tabinet, with little foxes’ 
heads upon it, lined with brown satin and having round mulberry buttons. It was 
strange that his mother had had no musical talent though Aunt Kate used to call 
her the brains carrier of the Morkan family. Both she and Julia had always 
seemed a little proud of their serious and matronly sister. Her photograph 
stood before the pierglass. She held an open book on her knees and was pointing 
out something in it to Constantine who, dressed in a man-o’-war suit, lay at 
her feet. It was she who had chosen the name of her sons for she was very 
sensible of the dignity of family life. Thanks to her, Constantine was now 
senior curate in Balbrigan and, thanks to her, Gabriel himself had taken his 
degree in the Royal University. A shadow passed over his face as he remembered 
her sullen opposition to his marriage. Some slighting phrases she had used 
still rankled in his memory; she had once spoken of Gretta as being country 
cute and that was not true of Gretta at all. It was Gretta who had nursed her 
during all her last long illness in their house at Monkstown. 

He knew that Mary Jane must be near the end of her piece for she was playing 
again the opening melody with runs of scales after every bar and while he 
waited for the end the resentment died down in his heart. The piece ended with 
a trill of octaves in the treble and a final deep octave in the bass. Great 
applause greeted Mary Jane as, blushing and rolling up her music nervously, she 
escaped from the room. The most vigorous clapping came from the four young men 
in the doorway who had gone away to the refreshment-room at the beginning of 
the piece but had come back when the piano had stopped. 

Lancers were arranged. Gabriel found himself partnered with Miss Ivors. She was 
a frank-mannered talkative young lady, with a freckled face and prominent brown 
eyes. She did not wear a low-cut bodice and the large brooch which was fixed in 
the front of her collar bore on it an Irish device and motto. 

When they had taken their places she said abruptly: 

“I have a crow to pluck with you. ” 

“With me?” said Gabriel. 

She nodded her head gravely. 

“What is it?” asked Gabriel, smiling at her solemn manner. 

“Who is G. C. On the mantelpiece of this little office a little leaden 
battalion of canisters was drawn up and on the table before the window stood 
four or five china bowls which were usually half full of a black liquid. From 
these bowls Mr Kernan tasted tea. He took a mouthful, drew it up, saturated his 
palate with it and then spat it forth into the grate. Then he paused to judge. 
” 

The gentlemen drank again, one following another’s example. Mr Kernan seemed 
to be weighing something in his mind. He was impressed. Even when he was out at 
elbows and at his wits’ end for money he kept up a bold face. Little Chandler 
remembered (and the remembrance brought a slight flush of pride to his cheek) 
one of Ignatius Gallaher’s sayings when he was in a tight corner: 

“Half time now, boys,” he used to say light-heartedly. “Where’s my 
considering cap?” 

That was Ignatius Gallaher all out; and, damn it, you couldn’t but admire him 
for it. 

Little Chandler quickened his pace. For the first time in his life he felt 
himself superior to the people he passed. For the first time his soul revolted 
against the dull inelegance of Capel Street. There was no doubt about it: if 
you wanted to succeed you had to go away. You could do nothing in Dublin. As he 
crossed Grattan Bridge he looked down the river towards the lower quays and 
pitied the poor stunted houses. They seemed to him a band of tramps, huddled 
together along the riverbanks, their old coats covered with dust and soot, 
stupefied by the panorama of sunset and waiting for the first chill of night 
bid them arise, shake themselves and begone. He wondered whether he could write 
a poem to express his idea. Perhaps Gallaher might be able to get it into some 
London paper for him. Could he write something original? He was not sure what 
idea he wished to express but the thought that a poetic moment had touched him 
took life within him like an infant hope. He stepped onward bravely. 

Every step brought him nearer to London, farther from his own sober inartistic 
life. A light began to tremble on the horizon of his mind. He was not so 
old--thirty-two. His temperament might be said to be just at the point of 
maturity. There were so many different moods and impressions that he wished to 
express in verse. He felt them within him. He tried to weigh his soul to see if 
it was a poet’s soul. Melancholy was the dominant note of his temperament, he 
thought, but it was a melancholy tempered by recurrences of faith and 
resignation and simple joy. If he could give expression to it in a book of 
poems perhaps men would listen. He would never be popular: he saw that. He 
could not sway the crowd but he might appeal to a little circle of kindred 
minds. The English critics, perhaps, would recognise him as one of the Celtic 
school by reason of the melancholy tone of his poems; besides that, he would 
put in allusions. He began to invent sentences and phrases from the notice 
which his book would get. _“Mr Chandler has the gift of easy and graceful 
verse. ”. . 
