I didn’t do anything. Mrs Kearney looked searchingly at the oldish face which 
was screwed into an expression of trustfulness and enthusiasm and answered: 

“No, thank you!” 

The little woman hoped they would have a good house. But the kettle would be on 
the hob to make punch. He sat a long time over it. But still it was a strange 
and a great sin even to touch it. Of course it is idealistic, German, 
ultra-profound. 

Neither of the others spoke. Donovan took leave of them urbanely. 

--Indeed you might, answered Heron. 

--Well, I must go now, said Stephen, who cared little for such points of 
honour. Farrington pulled up his sleeve accordingly and showed his biceps 
muscle to the company. Why, Johnny Cashman, you must be nearing the century. 

--Well, I'll tell you the truth, said the little old man. 

“O, don’t let that trouble you, Jack,” said Mr Henchy. 

Mr Hynes sat on the side of the table near Mr Lyons but said nothing. ” 

In another corner of the room were Mrs Kearney and her husband, Mr Bell, Miss 
Healy and the young lady who had to recite the patriotic piece. Mrs Kearney 
said that the Committee had treated her scandalously. She had spared neither 
trouble nor expense and this was how she was repaid. 

They thought they had only a girl to deal with and that, therefore, they could 
ride roughshod over her. She spoke also of the beautiful house her daughter 
kept in Glasgow, and of all the friends they had there. He looked at it and saw 
that Wells was afraid. In the silence of the soft grey air he heard the cricket 
bats from here and from there: pock. That was a sound to hear but if you were 
hit then you would feel a pain. All seemed weary of life even before entering 
upon it. One day he had stood beside her looking into the hotel grounds. A 
waiter was running up a trail of bunting on the flagstaff and a fox terrier was 
scampering to and fro on the sunny lawn. She had put her hand into his pocket 
where his hand was and he had felt how cool and thin and soft her hand was. 

He heard the voice of the prefect of the chapel saying the last prayers. 
Shrinking from that life he turned towards the wall, making a cowl of the 
blanket and staring at the great overblown scarlet flowers of the tattered 
wallpaper. He tried to warm his perishing joy in their scarlet glow, imagining 
a roseway from where he lay upwards to heaven all strewn with scarlet flowers. 
And all over the playgrounds they were playing rounders and bowling twisters 
and lobs. And from here and from there came the sounds of the cricket bats 
through the soft grey air. 

My book was closed, I read no more, Watching the fire dance On the floor. One 
boot stood upright, its limp upper fallen down: the fellow of it lay upon its 
side. Every day there was something in the paper about it. 

Little Chandler quickened his pace. For the first time in his life he felt 
himself superior to the people he passed. 

He sat again in the front bench of the chapel. Four boys left the room; and he 
heard others passing down the corridor. Mrs Kearney asked him when was her 
daughter going to be paid. Mr Holohan said that Mr Fitzpatrick had charge of 
that. By hell, I saw that at once. Mrs Kearney wrapped the cloak round her 
daughter and followed him. 

Her image had passed into his soul for ever and no word had broken the holy 
silence of his ecstasy. Her eyes had called him and his soul had leaped at the 
call. To live, to err, to fall, to triumph, to recreate life out of life! A 
wild angel had appeared to him, the angel of mortal youth and beauty, an envoy 
from the fair courts of life, to throw open before him in an instant of ecstasy 
the gates of all the ways of error and glory. A sin, an instant of folly and 
weakness, drove Adam and Eve out of Eden and brought death and suffering into 
the world. 

APRIL 10. Faintly, under the heavy night, through the silence of the city which 
has turned from dreams to dreamless sleep as a weary lover whom no caresses 
move, the sound of hoofs upon the road. 

It was the last tram. I could easily catch hold of her when she comes up to my 
step: nobody is looking. I could hold her and kiss her. 

Hm!. . . Do you hear me now?” 

“Yes, sir. 

--Have you ever felt that you had a vocation? 

Stephen parted his lips to answer yes and then withheld the word suddenly. 
“Give us that thing you wrote--do you remember? Have you got it on you?” 

“O, ay!” said Mr Henchy. “He hasn’t got those little pigs’ eyes for 
nothing. He felt completely out-generalled. But a pleased expression flickered 
across his face. 

Little Chandler sustained for one moment the gaze of her eyes and his heart 
closed together as he met the hatred in them. ” 

“To be sure,” said Aunt Kate again. 

They drove in a jingle across Cork while it was still early morning and Stephen 
finished his sleep in a bedroom of the Victoria Hotel. Stephen walked on alone 
and out into the quiet of Kildare Street opposite Maple's hotel he stood to 
wait, patient again. 

The man continued his monologue. He understood little or nothing of it at first 
but he became slowly aware that his father had enemies and that some fight was 
going to take place. The boy that held the censer had swung it lifted by the 
middle chain to keep the coals lighting. That was called charcoal: and it had 
burned quietly as the fellow had swung it gently and had given off a weak sour 
smell. It was not like the smell of the old peasants who knelt at the back of 
the chapel at Sunday mass. It was a mean thing to do, to shoulder him into the 
square ditch, they were saying. . . . ’ ‘That’ll be all right, Mr H. B. 
Patterson Finlay, on behalf of the railway company, expressed his deep regret 
at the accident. Mr Cunningham said that he had once known a similar case. He 
was an elder colleague of Mr Power. 

“Sha, ‘s nothing,” said Mr Kernan, closing his mouth and pulling the 
collar of his filthy coat across his neck. He wore a round hat of hard black 
felt. His face, shining with raindrops, had the appearance of damp yellow 
cheese save where two rosy spots indicated the cheekbones. He opened his very 
long mouth suddenly to express disappointment and at the same time opened wide 
his very bright blue eyes to express pleasure and surprise. 

“O Father Keon!” said Mr Henchy, jumping up from his chair. She declined 
it, saying she was ironing downstairs, and, after having exchanged a nod with 
Mr Cunningham behind Mr Power’s back, prepared to leave the room. One of them 
was a very fat man whose blue serge clothes seemed to be in danger of falling 
from his sloping figure. One of the prefects, smiling and nodding his head, 
approached the dark corner and, having bowed to the stout old lady, said 
pleasantly: 

--Is this a beautiful young lady or a doll that you have here, Mrs Tallon? 

Then, bending down to peer at the smiling painted face under the leaf of the 
bonnet, he exclaimed: 

--No! Upon my word I believe it's little Bertie Tallon after all! 

Stephen at his post by the window heard the old lady and the priest laugh 
together and heard the boys' murmurs of admiration behind him as they passed 
forward to see the little boy who had to dance the sunbonnet dance by himself. 

--O, my dear little brothers in Christ, may it never be our lot to hear that 
language! May it never be our lot, I say! In the last day of terrible reckoning 
I pray fervently to God that not a single soul of those who are in this chapel 
today may be found among those miserable beings whom the Great Judge shall 
command to depart for ever from His sight, that not one of us may ever hear 
ringing in his ears the awful sentence of rejection: DEPART FROM ME, YE CURSED, 
INTO EVERLASTING FIRE WHICH WAS PREPARED FOR THE DEVIL AND HIS ANGELS! 

He came down the aisle of the chapel, his legs shaking and the scalp of his 
head trembling as though it had been touched by ghostly fingers. He passed up 
the staircase and into the corridor along the walls of which the overcoats and 
waterproofs hung like gibbeted malefactors, headless and dripping and 
shapeless. And at every step he feared that he had already died, that his soul 
had been wrenched forth of the sheath of his body, that he was plunging 
headlong through space. 

He could not grip the floor with his feet and sat heavily at his desk, opening 
one of his books at random and poring over it. YOU BETTER MIND YOURSELF FATHER 
DOLAN, said I, OR YOUNG DEDALUS WILL SEND YOU UP FOR TWICE NINE. A keen east 
wind hit them, blowing from the mouth of the river. We pleased ourselves with 
the spectacle of Dublin’s commerce--the barges signalled from far away by 
their curls of woolly smoke, the brown fishing fleet beyond Ringsend, the big 
white sailing-vessel which was being discharged on the opposite quay. Mahony 
said it would be right skit to run away to sea on one of those big ships and 
even I, looking at the high masts, saw, or imagined, the geography which had 
been scantily dosed to me at school gradually taking substance under my eyes. 
He had never felt like that himself towards any woman but he knew that such a 
feeling must be love. How could it be otherwise? Every breath that we draw, 
every thought of our brain, every instant of life proceeds from God's 
inexhaustible goodness. 

The slide was shot to suddenly. The priest waited for the answer and added: 

--I mean, have you ever felt within yourself, in your soul, a desire to join 
the order? Think. 

--I have sometimes thought of it, said Stephen. Many's the time we went down 
there when our names had been marked, a crowd of us, Harry Peard and little 
Jack Mountain and Bob Dyas and Maurice Moriarty, the Frenchman, and Tom O'Grady 
and Mick Lacy that I told you of this morning and Joey Corbet and poor little 
good-hearted Johnny Keevers of the Tantiles. 

The leaves of the trees along the Mardyke were astir and whispering in the 
sunlight. A team of cricketers passed, agile young men in flannels and blazers, 
one of them carrying the long green wicket-bag. In a quiet bystreet a German 
band of five players in faded uniforms and with battered brass instruments was 
playing to an audience of street arabs and leisurely messenger boys. All were 
shouting and the prefects urged them on with strong cries. The evening air was 
pale and chilly and after every charge and thud of the footballers the greasy 
leather orb flew like a heavy bird through the grey light. She had taken off 
her hat and cloak and was standing before a large swinging mirror, unhooking 
her waist. Gabriel paused for a few moments, watching her, and then said: 

“Gretta!” 

She turned away from the mirror slowly and walked along the shaft of light 
towards him. ” 

In fact right behind her Gabriel could be seen piloting Freddy Malins across 
the landing. The latter, a young man of about forty, was of Gabriel’s size 
and build, with very round shoulders. He stretched himself cautiously along 
under the sheets and lay down beside his wife. 

“God!” he exclaimed, resuming his natural face, “I never saw such an eye 
in a man’s head. 

Lenehan observed them for a few minutes. ” 

He set to his supper and took no part in the conversation with which the table 
covered Lily’s removal of the plates. ” 

He illustrated the story by grotesque gestures. 

“At dinner, you know. 

And the fellow who had spoken first said: 

--Yes, that's what I heard too from the fellow in the higher line. When we come 
to the phenomena of artistic conception, artistic gestation, and artistic 
reproduction I require a new terminology and a new personal experience. 

--Of course, said Lynch. 

--This hypothesis, Stephen began. 

A long dray laden with old iron came round the corner of Sir Patrick Dun's 
hospital covering the end of Stephen's speech with the harsh roar of jangled 
and rattling metal. Lynch closed his ears and gave out oath after oath till the 
dray had passed. He was neither flattered nor confused, but simply wished the 
banter to end. One evening his father came home full of news which kept his 
tongue busy all through dinner. I was quite bad. I was awake a long time that 
night. Mrs Kearney said nothing, but, as the mediocre items followed one 
another on the platform and the few people in the hall grew fewer and fewer, 
she began to regret that she had put herself to any expense for such a concert. 
There was something she didn’t like in the look of things and Mr 
Fitzpatrick’s vacant smile irritated her very much. However, she said nothing 
and waited to see how it would end. The pot of pink enamel paint gave out and 
the wainscot of his bedroom remained with its unfinished and ill-plastered 
coat. 

His household returned to its usual way of life. 

Lynch smote himself sonorously on the chest and said: 

--Who has anything to say about my girth? 

Cranly took him at the word and the two began to tussle. When their faces had 
flushed with the struggle they drew apart, panting. 

The fellows had seen him running. They closed round him in a ring, pushing one 
against another to hear. ” 

“Who?” said I. I answered that I had none. Once a priest always a priest, 
remember. “I remember now there was a policeman. The vastness and strangeness 
of the life suggested to him by the bales of merchandise stocked along the 
walls or swung aloft out of the holds of steamers wakened again in him the 
unrest which had sent him wandering in the evening from garden to garden in 
search of Mercedes. And amid this new bustling life he might have fancied 
himself in another Marseille but that he missed the bright sky and the 
sun-warmed trellises of the wineshops. A vague dissatisfaction grew up within 
him as he looked on the quays and on the river and on the lowering skies and 
yet he continued to wander up and down day after day as if he really sought 
someone that eluded him. He started with delight and, keeping close to his 
lamp-post, tried to read the result in their walk. They were walking quickly, 
the young woman taking quick short steps, while Corley kept beside her with his 
long stride. They did not seem to be speaking. 

“He was too scrupulous always,” she said. 

Now I call that friendly, don't you? 

Yes, I liked her today. ” 

“Who did you get?” asked Mr Lyons. 

--Who caught them? 

--Mr Gleeson and the minister. And if the minister did it he would go to the 
rector: and the rector to the provincial: and the provincial to the general of 
the jesuits. It was hard to think what because you would have to think of them 
in a different way with different coloured coats and trousers and with beards 
and moustaches and different kinds of hats. 

The door opened quietly and closed. They closed for an instant and then opened. 
He saw. 

A field of stiff weeds and thistles and tufted nettle-bunches. Thick among the 
tufts of rank stiff growth lay battered canisters and clots and coils of solid 
excrement. A faint marshlight struggling upwards from all the ordure through 
the bristling grey-green weeds. Soft language issued from their spittleless 
lips as they swished in slow circles round and round the field, winding hither 
and thither through the weeds, dragging their long tails amid the rattling 
canisters. They moved in slow circles, circling closer and closer to enclose, 
to enclose, soft language issuing from their lips, their long swishing tails 
besmeared with stale shite, thrusting upwards their terrific faces. 

The former tenant of our house, a priest, had died in the back drawing-room. 
Air, musty from having been long enclosed, hung in all the rooms, and the waste 
room behind the kitchen was littered with old useless papers. I tell you. Let 
no worldly shame hold you back. And one night she brought me two bloody fine 
cigars--O, the real cheese, you know, that the old fellow used to smoke. . Here 
you are, Tommy. ” 

Little Chandler said nothing until the barman returned with two glasses: then 
he touched his friend’s glass lightly and reciprocated the former toast. He 
was beginning to feel somewhat disillusioned. Gallaher’s accent and way of 
expressing himself did not please him. 

“I was just telling my mother,” he said, “I never heard you sing so well, 
never. O, what a dreadful punishment! An eternity of endless agony, of endless 
bodily and spiritual torment, without one ray of hope, without one moment of 
cessation, of agony limitless in intensity, of torment infinitely varied, of 
torture that sustains eternally that which it eternally devours, of anguish 
that everlastingly preys upon the spirit while it racks the flesh, an eternity, 
every instant of which is itself an eternity of woe. Such is the terrible 
punishment decreed for those who die in mortal sin by an almighty and a just 
God. He would love his neighbour. 

--Byron, of course, answered Stephen. Next business. But. . . 

--Hynes has no brains. He got through by stewing, pure stewing. 

--Don't mind him. It seemed to him that he heard notes of fitful music leaping 
upwards a tone and downwards a diminished fourth, upwards a tone and downwards 
a major third, like triple-branching flames leaping fitfully, flame after 
flame, out of a midnight wood. It was an elfin prelude, endless and formless; 
and, as it grew wilder and faster, the flames leaping out of time, he seemed to 
hear from under the boughs and grasses wild creatures racing, their feet 
pattering like rain upon the leaves. Their feet passed in pattering tumult over 
his mind, the feet of hares and rabbits, the feet of harts and hinds and 
antelopes, until he heard them no more and remembered only a proud cadence from 
Newman: 

--Whose feet are as the feet of harts and underneath the everlasting arms. When 
he reached the foot of the staircase he glanced up and saw Jack regarding him 
from the door of the return-room. 

Suddenly he remembered the night when one of the music-hall _artistes_, a 
little blond Londoner, had made a rather free allusion to Polly. Things were as 
she had suspected: she had been frank in her questions and Polly had been frank 
in her answers. 

Of course they had good reason to be fussy on such a night. He peered out for 
an instant over the coverlet and saw the yellow curtains round and before his 
bed that shut him off on all sides. When the morning practice was over the 
trainer would make his comments and sometimes illustrate them by shuffling 
along for a yard or so comically in an old pair of blue canvas shoes. A small 
ring of wonderstruck children and nursemaids would gather to watch him and 
linger even when he and uncle Charles had sat down again and were talking 
athletics and politics. Though he had heard his father say that Mike Flynn had 
put some of the best runners of modern times through his hands Stephen often 
glanced at his trainer's flabby stubble-covered face, as it bent over the long 
stained fingers through which he rolled his cigarette, and with pity at the 
mild lustreless blue eyes which would look up suddenly from the task and gaze 
vaguely into the blue distance while the long swollen fingers ceased their 
rolling and grains and fibres of tobacco fell back into the pouch. 

On the way home uncle Charles would often pay a visit to the chapel and, as the 
font was above Stephen's reach, the old man would dip his hand and then 
sprinkle the water briskly about Stephen's clothes and on the floor of the 
porch. Cranly turned, and Dixon, who had whistled, called out: 

--Where are you fellows off to? What about that game, Cranly? 

They parleyed in shouts across the still air about a game of billiards to be 
played in the Adelphi hotel. Stephen walked on alone and out into the quiet of 
Kildare Street opposite Maple's hotel he stood to wait, patient again. By the 
time they had crossed the quadrangle his restlessness had risen to fever. At 
the first bend of the road I looked back and she was standing at the door. A 
voice asked who was there and I answered I was over at the match in Buttevant 
and was walking back and that I'd be thankful for a glass of water. 

--He tells us in his homely way, the dean went on, that he put an iron lamp 
before a statue of one of the gods and that a thief stole the lamp. He began to 
mimic his son’s flat accent, saying half to himself: _“At the chapel. The 
corridors were darkly lit and the chapel was darkly lit. Soon all would be dark 
and sleeping. 

She had passed through the dusk. It was Heron who had called out and, as he 
marched forward between his two attendants, he cleft the air before him with a 
thin cane in time to their steps. Get it out in bits! 

Temple turned right and left, making sudden feeble gestures as he spoke. Then 
he lay back on the pillow and said: 

--There is another way but I won't tell you what it is. The feelings excited by 
improper art are kinetic, desire or loathing. Desire urges us to possess, to go 
to something; loathing urges us to abandon, to go from something. Gabriel was 
surprised at her stillness and strained his ear to listen also. He could not 
see her face but he could see the terracotta and salmon-pink panels of her 
skirt which the shadow made appear black and white. It will go away. First came 
the vacation and then the next term and then vacation again and then again 
another term and then again the vacation. It was like a train going in and out 
of tunnels and that was like the noise of the boys eating in the refectory when 
you opened and closed the flaps of the ears. Term, vacation; tunnel, out; 
noise, stop. 

Then the higher line fellows began to come down along the matting in the middle 
of the refectory, Paddy Rath and Jimmy Magee and the Spaniard who was allowed 
to smoke cigars and the little Portuguese who wore the woolly cap. And then the 
lower line tables and the tables of the third line. 

The fellows all were silent. 

“Tell us,” said Mahony pertly to the man, “how many have you yourself?” 

The man smiled as before and said that when he was our age he had lots of 
sweethearts. Mahony mentioned lightly that he had three totties. The man asked 
me how many had I. P. ” 

“O, yes, positively,” said Little Chandler. 

He sipped a little of his drink while Ignatius Gallaher finished his boldly. 
All you know about poetry is what you wrote up on the slates in the yard and 
were going to be sent to the loft for. 

--I am glad he escaped, Stephen had said with a laugh, but surely that's not 
the strange thing that happened you? 

--Well, I suppose that doesn't interest you, but leastways there was such noise 
after the match that I missed the train home and I couldn't get any kind of a 
yoke to give me a lift for, as luck would have it, there was a mass meeting 
that same day over in Castletownroche and all the cars in the country were 
there. 

--I may not have his talent, said Stephen quietly. 

--You never know, said the dean brightly. We never can say what is in us. He 
was passing by the house. 

As soon as the first part was ended Mr Fitzpatrick and Mr Holohan went over to 
Mrs Kearney and told her that the other four guineas would be paid after the 
Committee meeting on the following Tuesday and that, in case her daughter did 
not play for the second part, the Committee would consider the contract broken 
and would pay nothing. I will defend my church and my religion when it is 
insulted and spit on by renegade catholics. 

Mr Casey pushed his plate rudely into the middle of the table and, resting his 
elbows before him, said in a hoarse voice to his host: 

--Tell me, did I tell you that story about a very famous spit? 

--You did not, John, said Mr Dedalus. We are in Cork, in Ireland. 

--Were they, faith? said Mr Casey. 

He threw his fist on the table and, frowning angrily, protruded one finger 
after another. Here, Tim or Tom or whatever your name is, give us the same 
again here. I always feel easier in my mind when he’s here. And that’s the 
honest truth. Were you at all shocked by what I said? 

--Somewhat, Stephen said. 

I did not smile. My aunt said to him energetically: 

“Can’t you give him the money and let him go? You’ve kept him late enough 
as it is. 

Why did he not tell it? His father, who kept the racehorses, must be a 
magistrate too like Saurin's father and Nasty Roche's father. Whenever he 
showed the photograph to a visitor her father used to pass it with a casual 
word: 

“He is in Melbourne now. Still, I know he’s gone and all to that. That was 
called politics. 

--The bishops and priests of Ireland have spoken, said Dante, and they must be 
obeyed. 

--Let them leave politics alone, said Mr Casey, or the people may leave their 
church alone. He was happy and free; but he would not be anyway proud with 
Father Dolan. You're an impudent thief, he said. 

--Damn your yellow insolence, answered Lynch. 

Stephen repeated the definitions slowly. 

He could hear the tolling. He said over to himself the song that Brigid had 
taught him. And when he had tried to open Mr Casey's hand to see if the purse 
of silver was hidden there he had seen that the fingers could not be 
straightened out: and Mr Casey had told him that he had got those three cramped 
fingers making a birthday present for Queen Victoria. Names. 

The memory of his childhood suddenly grew dim. The yellow gas-flames arose 
before his troubled vision against the vapoury sky, burning as if before an 
altar. Before the doors and in the lighted halls groups were gathered arrayed 
as for some rite. He was in another world: he had awakened from a slumber of 
centuries. 

He stood still in the middle of the roadway, his heart clamouring against his 
bosom in a tumult. A young woman dressed in a long pink gown laid her hand on 
his arm to detain him and gazed into his face. At length he said: 

“Well. . all right. ” 

“_François_, the same again. The lumps of knotted flock under his head 
reminded him of the lumps of knotted horsehair in the sofa of her parlour on 
which he used to sit, smiling or serious, asking himself why he had come, 
displeased with her and with himself, confounded by the print of the Sacred 
Heart above the untenanted sideboard. He saw her approach him in a lull of the 
talk and beg him to sing one of his curious songs. Mrs Donnelly said _“Do, 
please, Maria!”_ and so Maria had to get up and stand beside the piano. A 
picture of the balcony scene in _Romeo and Juliet_ hung there and beside it was 
a picture of the two murdered princes in the Tower which Aunt Julia had worked 
in red, blue and brown wools when she was a girl. ” 

He had slightly emphasised his tone and he was aware that he had betrayed 
himself; but, though the colour had heightened in his cheek, he did not flinch 
from his friend’s gaze. The shadow took her faded dress into shelter but fell 
revengefully into the little cup behind her collar-bone. The noise of the hall 
became more audible. The first tenor and the baritone arrived together. ” 

Mr Kernan was silent. The proposal conveyed very little meaning to his mind 
but, understanding that some spiritual agencies were about to concern 
themselves on his behalf, he thought he owed it to his dignity to show a stiff 
neck. A grey woollen cloak was wrapped athwart her from her shoulder to her 
waist and her fair head was bent in willing shame. He had loose red-brown hair 
and tender shapely strong freckled hands. 

The professor had gone to the glass cases on the side wall, from a shelf of 
which he took down a set of coils, blew away the dust from many points and, 
bearing it carefully to the table, held a finger on it while he proceeded with 
his lecture. He explained that the wires in modern coils were of a compound 
called platinoid lately discovered by F. W. Martino. 

He spoke clearly the initials and surname of the discoverer. Moynihan whispered 
from behind: 

--Good old Fresh Water Martin! 

--Ask him, Stephen whispered back with weary humour, if he wants a subject for 
electrocution. He can have me. I noticed how clumsily her skirt was hooked at 
the back and how the heels of her cloth boots were trodden down all to one 
side. 

Every morning I lay on the floor in the front parlour watching her door. 

“O no, sir!” cried the girl, following him. Then, turning to Cranly, he 
said: 

--Good evening, particularly to you. 

--You are quite welcome, sir. 

--Have you ever felt that you had a vocation? 

Stephen parted his lips to answer yes and then withheld the word suddenly. 
“Give us that thing you wrote--do you remember? Have you got it on you?” 

“O, ay!” said Mr Henchy. “But won’t you come in and sit down a 
minute?” 

“No, no, thank you. Come away. Sorry because he was afraid. Afraid that it 
was some disease. Canker was a disease of plants and cancer one of animals: or 
another different. I HOPE I AM NOT DETAINING YOU. 

A race of clodhoppers! 

MARCH 25, MORNING. I had never spoken to her, except for a few casual words, 
and yet her name was like a summons to all my foolish blood. Yes, it was her 
body he smelt, a wild and languid smell, the tepid limbs over which his music 
had flowed desirously and the secret soft linen upon which her flesh distilled 
odour and a dew. 

A louse crawled over the nape of his neck and, putting his thumb and forefinger 
deftly beneath his loose collar, he caught it. That’s human nature. He felt 
acutely the contrast between his own life and his friend’s and it seemed to 
him unjust. Gallaher was his inferior in birth and education. He was sure that 
he could do something better than his friend had ever done, or could ever do, 
something higher than mere tawdry journalism if he only got the chance. What 
was it that stood in his way? His unfortunate timidity! He wished to vindicate 
himself in some way, to assert his manhood. The question of honour here raised 
was, like all such questions, trivial to him. O, what shame, what misery! The 
Ruler of the universe entreated you, a creature of clay, to love Him Who made 
you and to keep His law. No. You would not. I'm a democrat and I'll work and 
act for social liberty and equality among all classes and sexes in the United 
States of the Europe of the future. I did not know whether I would ever speak 
to her or not or, if I spoke to her, how I could tell her of my confused 
adoration. But my body was like a harp and her words and gestures were like 
fingers running upon the wires. 

One evening I went into the back drawing-room in which the priest had died. 

The singing ceased. They went on together, Cranly repeating in strongly 
stressed rhythm the end of the refrain: 

And when we are married, O, how happy we'll be For I love sweet Rosie O'Grady 
And Rosie O'Grady loves me. 

Fleming asked: 

--But why did they run away, tell us? 

--I know why, Cecil Thunder said. 

--O, he didn't, Simon! 

--Not he! said Mr Dedalus. We are in Cork, in Ireland. 

--Were they, faith? said Mr Casey. She stuck her ugly old face up at me when 
she said it and I had my mouth full of tobacco juice. I bent down to her and 
PHTH! says I to her like that. I wouldn’t like to face your journey home at 
this hour. And when two constabulary men had come into sight round a bend in 
the gloomy road he had broken off his prayer to whistle loudly an air from the 
last pantomime. 

He began to beat the frayed end of his ashplant against the base of a pillar. 
Had Cranly not heard him? Yet he could wait. 

--All, God! All, all! 

A messenger came to the door to say that confessions were being heard in the 
chapel. 

He passed out of the schoolhouse and halted under the shed that flanked the 
garden. Now that the play was over his nerves cried for some further adventure. 

An old man was dozing in a great hooded chair in the hall. From this humble 
state he had raised himself until he had become a first-rate _artiste_. He had 
appeared in grand opera. One night, when an operatic _artiste_ had fallen ill, 
he had undertaken the part of the king in the opera of _Maritana_ at the 
Queen’s Theatre. She was sitting there among the others perhaps waiting for 
him to appear. He tried to recall her appearance but could not. But his face 
was black-looking and his eyes were staring though his voice was so quiet. Then 
he asked Fleming and Fleming said that the word had no plural. Father Arnall 
suddenly shut the book and shouted at him: 

--Kneel out there in the middle of the class. 

Stephen had turned his smiling eyes towards his friend's face, flattered by his 
confidence and won over to sympathy by the speaker's simple accent. He watched 
her leave the room in the hope that she would look back at him, but he was 
disappointed. He lived at a little distance from his body, regarding his own 
acts with doubtful side-glances. He had an odd autobiographical habit which led 
him to compose in his mind from time to time a short sentence about himself 
containing a subject in the third person and a predicate in the past tense. He 
never gave alms to beggars and walked firmly, carrying a stout hazel. 

He had been for many years cashier of a private bank in Baggot Street. At the 
corner of George’s Street he met two friends of his and stopped to converse 
with them. The gentleman began to chat with her about Hallow Eve and the rainy 
weather. He supposed the bag was full of good things for the little ones and 
said it was only right that the youngsters should enjoy themselves while they 
were young. Maria agreed with him and favoured him with demure nods and hems. 
He was very nice with her, and when she was getting out at the Canal Bridge she 
thanked him and bowed, and he bowed to her and raised his hat and smiled 
agreeably, and while she was going up along the terrace, bending her tiny head 
under the rain, she thought how easy it was to know a gentleman even when he 
has a drop taken. What’s the world coming to when sons speaks that way to 
their father?” 

“What age is he?” said Mr O’Connor. 

“Well, I couldn’t go over while he was talking to Alderman Cowley. ” 

“Why didn’t you remind him?” said Mr O’Connor. 

“He’s not a bad sort,” said Mr Henchy, “only Fanning has such a loan of 
him. Yes? What? Yes? His flesh shrank together as it felt the approach of the 
ravenous tongues of flames, dried up as it felt about it the swirl of stifling 
air. 

A girl stood before him in midstream, alone and still, gazing out to sea. He 
was standing on the field; his hand was pressed to his side; his face was pale 
and strange and he wore the white cloak of a marshal. 

O how cold and strange it was to think of that! All the dark was cold and 
strange. He tried to think how it could be. 

I would be ever in that heart (O soft I knock and soft entreat her!) Where only 
peace might be my part. 

--Probably I shall go away, he said. 

--Where? Cranly asked. 

--From me! said Stephen in astonishment. I stumble on an idea once a fortnight 
if I am lucky. 

--These questions are very profound, Mr Dedalus, said the dean. It is like 
looking down from the cliffs of Moher into the depths. Many go down into the 
depths and never come up. Introduction. All I want is to have a look at her. Of 
course she had to work hard, both in the house and at business. 

“Why isn’t it your business?” asked Mrs Kearney. 

Her face was inundated with an angry colour and she looked as if she would 
attack someone with her hands. He liked to sit near him at the fire, looking up 
at his dark fierce face. She noticed that he wore his soft brown hat carelessly 
on the side of his head and that his accent was flat. For years and years it 
had gone off in splendid style as long as anyone could remember; ever since 
Kate and Julia, after the death of their brother Pat, had left the house in 
Stoney Batter and taken Mary Jane, their only niece, to live with them in the 
dark gaunt house on Usher’s Island, the upper part of which they had rented 
from Mr Fulham, the corn-factor on the ground floor. One boot stood upright, 
its limp upper fallen down: the fellow of it lay upon its side. Every sinful 
act is a thorn piercing His head. Every impure thought, deliberately yielded 
to, is a keen lance transfixing that sacred and loving heart. 



--O my God!-- --O my God!-- --I am heartily sorry-- --I am heartily sorry-- 
--for having offended Thee-- --for having offended Thee-- --and I detest my 
sins-- --and I detest my sins-- --above every other evil-- --above every other 
evil-- --because they displease Thee, my God-- --because they displease Thee, 
my God-- --Who art so deserving-- --Who art so deserving-- --of all my love-- 
--of all my love-- --and I firmly purpose-- --and I firmly purpose-- --by Thy 
holy grace-- --by Thy holy grace-- --never more to offend Thee-- --never more 
to offend Thee-- --and to amend my life-- --and to amend my life-- 



* * * * * 



He went up to his room after dinner in order to be alone with his soul, and at 
every step his soul seemed to sigh; at every step his soul mounted with his 
feet, sighing in the ascent, through a region of viscid gloom. 

He halted on the landing before the door and then, grasping the porcelain knob, 
opened the door quickly. I'll be home after you. And that’s the wish of a 
sincere friend, an old friend. 

“You think so?” he said. 

Mr Dedalus went to the end of the table and said: 

--Now, Mrs Riordan, sit over. Told me then how he broke Pennyfeather's heart. 







VII 

My love is in a light attire Among the apple-trees, Where the gay winds do most 
desire To run in companies. 

There, where the gay winds stay to woo The young leaves as they pass, My love 
goes slowly, bending to Her shadow on the grass; 

And where the sky's a pale blue cup Over the laughing land, My love goes 
lightly, holding up Her dress with dainty hand. 

“Hallo, Corley!” he cried again. Night prayers and then bed: he shivered 
and wanted to yawn. It would be lovely in a few minutes. The only persons who 
seemed to follow the music were Mary Jane herself, her hands racing along the 
key-board or lifted from it at the pauses like those of a priestess in 
momentary imprecation, and Aunt Kate standing at her elbow to turn the page. 

It was unfair and cruel because the doctor had told him not to read without 
glasses and he had written home to his father that morning to send him a new 
pair. 

--I wrote home, sir, said Stephen, and Father Arnall said I am not to study 
till they come. Like a beast in its lair his soul had lain down in its own 
filth but the blasts of the angel's trumpet had driven him forth from the 
darkness of sin into the light. She had taken off her hat and cloak and was 
standing before a large swinging mirror, unhooking her waist. Gabriel paused 
for a few moments, watching her, and then said: 

“Gretta!” 

She turned away from the mirror slowly and walked along the shaft of light 
towards him. He had a beautiful death, God be praised. ” 

“And everything. . . Am I right, Jack?” 

“That’s my principle, too,” said my uncle. “Let him learn to box his 
corner. ” 

Mr Power stood up. I had arranged to go for a spin on the bike with some 
fellows out by Malahide. He had lifted up his arms and spoken in ecstasy to the 
sombre nave of the trees, knowing that he stood on holy ground and in a holy 
hour. ” 

“I’d like nothing better this minute,” said Mr Browne stoutly, “than a 
rattling fine walk in the country or a fast drive with a good spanking goer 
between the shafts. ” 

“We used to have a very good horse and trap at home,” said Aunt Julia 
sadly. But in a moment his sadness left him and he was hotly disputing with 
Cranly and the two players who had finished their game. They stopped just 
before the end of it to drink for luck. Jimmy understood that the game lay 
between Routh and Ségouin. They were not much more than acquaintances as yet 
but Jimmy found great pleasure in the society of one who had seen so much of 
the world and was reputed to own some of the biggest hotels in France. Such a 
person (as his father agreed) was well worth knowing, even if he had not been 
the charming companion he was. Now, then! There's a memory for you! 

--That's three generations--four generations, said another of the company. 

Mrs Kearney brought her daughter over to them, and talked to them amiably. She 
wanted to be on good terms with them but, while she strove to be polite, her 
eyes followed Mr Holohan in his limping and devious courses. As soon as she 
could she excused herself and went out after him. Often, as he sat in Davin's 
rooms in Grantham Street, wondering at his friend's well-made boots that 
flanked the wall pair by pair and repeating for his friend's simple ear the 
verses and cadences of others which were the veils of his own longing and 
dejection, the rude Firbolg mind of his listener had drawn his mind towards it 
and flung it back again, drawing it by a quiet inbred courtesy of attention or 
by a quaint turn of old English speech or by the force of its delight in rude 
bodily skill--for Davin had sat at the feet of Michael Cusack, the 
Gael--repelling swiftly and suddenly by a grossness of intelligence or by a 
bluntness of feeling or by a dull stare of terror in the eyes, the terror of 
soul of a starving Irish village in which the curfew was still a nightly fear. 
On Sunday mornings as he passed the church door he glanced coldly at the 
worshippers who stood bareheaded, four deep, outside the church, morally 
present at the mass which they could neither see nor hear. ” 

“Who?” said I. P. ” 

“O, yes, positively,” said Little Chandler. 

“Any youngsters?” said Ignatius Gallaher. 

Little Chandler blushed again. ” 

“Good-night, all. ” 

She went on to the window and stood there, looking out. Gabriel shot the lock 
to. 

But one unto him Will softly move And softly woo him In ways of love. The tears 
gathered more thickly in his eyes and in the partial darkness he imagined he 
saw the form of a young man standing under a dripping tree. 

--Alas, my dear little boys, they too fell. 

He waited for some moments, listening, before he too took up the air with them. 
He was glad that he could rest from all his walking. His friends asked him had 
he seen Corley and what was the latest. He replied that he had spent the day 
with Corley. “I know the way to get around her, man. ” 

He drank and the other gentlemen followed his lead. Then he resumed: 

“There they were at it, all the cardinals and bishops and archbishops from 
all the ends of the earth and these two fighting dog and devil until at last 
the Pope himself stood up and declared infallibility a dogma of the Church _ex 
cathedra_. On the very moment John MacHale, who had been arguing and arguing 
against it, stood up and shouted out with the voice of a lion: 
‘_Credo!_’” 

“_I believe!_” said Mr Fogarty. ” 

“O, come in! come in!” 

A pale oval face came forward into the light. He kept on the fringe of his 
line, out of sight of his prefect, out of the reach of the rude feet, feigning 
to run now and then. Probably, and neglected. Hence Cranly's despair of soul: 
the child of exhausted loins. 

MARCH 21, MORNING. I had never spoken to her, except for a few casual words, 
and yet her name was like a summons to all my foolish blood. 

Her image accompanied me even in places the most hostile to romance. On 
Saturday evenings when my aunt went marketing I had to go to carry some of the 
parcels. We walked through the flaring streets, jostled by drunken men and 
bargaining women, amid the curses of labourers, the shrill litanies of 
shop-boys who stood on guard by the barrels of pigs’ cheeks, the nasal 
chanting of street-singers, who sang a _come-all-you_ about O’Donovan Rossa, 
or a ballad about the troubles in our native land. These noises converged in a 
single sensation of life for me: I imagined that I bore my chalice safely 
through a throng of foes. Her name sprang to my lips at moments in strange 
prayers and praises which I myself did not understand. Freddy Malins explained 
to him, as best he could, that the monks were trying to make up for the sins 
committed by all the sinners in the outside world. Yet eternity had no end. He 
was in mortal sin. It is a terrible sin. Yes, the preacher was right. I’m 
only a stupid old woman and I wouldn’t presume to do such a thing. Ah, 
there’s no city like Paris for gaiety, movement, excitement. He had been seen 
by many of his friends that day in the company of these Continentals. At the 
control Ségouin had presented him to one of the French competitors and, in 
answer to his confused murmur of compliment, the swarthy face of the driver had 
disclosed a line of shining white teeth. 

“I hope you’ll spend an evening with us,” he said, “before you go back. 
Much to Farrington’s relief he drank a glass of bitter this time. The three 
blasts of the angel filled all the universe. 

He turned to the flyleaf of the geography and read what he had written there: 
himself, his name and where he was. Now, then! There's a memory for you! 

--That's three generations--four generations, said another of the company. Why, 
Johnny Cashman, you must be nearing the century. 

--Well, I'll tell you the truth, said the little old man. 

“I’ ‘ery ‘uch o’liged to you, sir,” said the injured man. 

--I'm an emotional man, said Temple. 

--But he, Temple said, pointing to Cranly, he is a ballocks, too, like me. 

He knelt to say his penance, praying in a corner of the dark nave; and his 
prayers ascended to heaven from his purified heart like perfume streaming 
upwards from a heart of white rose. But perhaps somewhere in the world you 
could. --If you want a good smoke, he said, try one of these cigars. An 
American captain made me a present of them last night in Queenstown. 

Stephen heard his father's voice break into a laugh which was almost a sob. 

--He was the handsomest man in Cork at that time, by God he was! The women used 
to stand to look after him in the street. We’ll be coming back. 

“Bravo,” he said, “I wouldn’t doubt you, Tommy. ” 

Little Chandler said nothing until the barman returned with two glasses: then 
he touched his friend’s glass lightly and reciprocated the former toast. 

“I met some of the old gang today,” said Ignatius Gallaher. “I didn’t 
know your address or I’d have done so at the time. 

“But only for ten minutes, Molly,” said Mrs Conroy. “That’s the latest. 
He replied that he had spent the day with Corley. His friends talked very 
little. . . . . . ” 





CLAY 

THE matron had given her leave to go out as soon as the women’s tea was over 
and Maria looked forward to her evening out. All the work we had, she and me, 
getting in the woman to wash him and then laying him out and then the coffin 
and then arranging about the Mass in the chapel. The corridors were darkly lit 
and the chapel was darkly lit. The man went up by the houses until he reached 
the door of the office, wondering whether he could finish his copy in time. The 
three blasts of the angel filled all the universe. 

He turned to the flyleaf of the geography and read what he had written there: 
himself, his name and where he was. And how cold and slimy the water had been! 
And a fellow had once seen a big rat jump plop into the scum. Mother was 
sitting at the fire with Dante waiting for Brigid to bring in the tea. How 
simple and beautiful was life after all! And life lay all before him. He had 
been a canvasser for Wilkins, the Conservative, but when the Conservatives had 
withdrawn their man and, choosing the lesser of two evils, given their support 
to the Nationalist candidate, he had been engaged to work for Mr Tierney. ” 

“O, he’s as tricky as they make ‘em,” said Mr Henchy. “But won’t 
you come in and sit down a minute?” 

“No, no, thank you. 

O bend no more in revery When he at eventide is calling. He had never been seen 
in the city without a silk hat of some decency and a pair of gaiters. By grace 
of these two articles of clothing, he said, a man could always pass muster. He 
carried on the tradition of his Napoleon, the great Blackwhite, whose memory he 
evoked at times by legend and mimicry. Modern business methods had spared him 
only so far as to allow him a little office in Crowe Street on the window blind 
of which was written the name of his firm with the address--London, E. C. On 
the mantelpiece of this little office a little leaden battalion of canisters 
was drawn up and on the table before the window stood four or five china bowls 
which were usually half full of a black liquid. From these bowls Mr Kernan 
tasted tea. He took a mouthful, drew it up, saturated his palate with it and 
then spat it forth into the grate. 

“I wouldn’t like children of mine,” he said, “to have too much to say 
to a man like that. 

--Did they hurt you much? Nasty Roche asked. 

--Do you mean women? 

--I am not speaking of that, Cranly said in a colder tone. Stephen's mind 
halted by instinct, checked by the strange tone and the imagery and by the 
priest's face which seemed like an unlit lamp or a reflector hung in a false 
focus. What lay behind it or within it? A dull torpor of the soul or the 
dullness of the thundercloud, charged with intellection and capable of the 
gloom of God? 

--I meant a different kind of lamp, sir, said Stephen. 

Mr Tate withdrew his delving hand and spread out the essay. 

A hush fell on the class. You are one of the idlest boys I ever met. Copy out 
your themes again the rest of you. We can have a little music and----” 

“Thanks awfully, old chap,” said Ignatius Gallaher, “I’m sorry we 
didn’t meet earlier. But I must leave tomorrow night. Free. Soul free and 
fancy free. Let the dead bury the dead. Tizzie Dunn was dead, too, and the 
Waters had gone back to England. Everything changes. Now she was going to go 
away like the others, to leave her home. Stephen listened to them in some 
wonderment for Boland was the dunce and Nash the idler of the class. Mr Tate 
did not break it but dug with his hand between his thighs while his heavily 
starched linen creaked about his neck and wrists. Stephen did not look up. 

--Because there is a thigh in it, he said. “Only for him----” 

“O, only for him,” said Mr Power, “it might have been a case of seven 
days, without the option of a fine. The conversation went no further. The first 
tenor bent his head and began to count the links of the gold chain which was 
extended across his waist, smiling and humming random notes to observe the 
effect on the frontal sinus. From time to time everyone glanced at Mrs Kearney. 
“I have my contract, and I intend to see that it is carried out. The upper 
part of the hall was now completely dark. 

Gazing up into the darkness I saw myself as a creature driven and derided by 
vanity; and my eyes burned with anguish and anger. Tiresome old red-nosed 
imbecile! 

It was late when I fell asleep. Though I was angry with old Cotter for alluding 
to me as a child, I puzzled my head to extract meaning from his unfinished 
sentences. In the dark of my room I imagined that I saw again the heavy grey 
face of the paralytic. I drew the blankets over my head and tried to think of 
Christmas. ” 

She laughed herself this time good-humouredly and then added quickly: 

“But tell him to come in, Mary Jane, and close the door. His arbour, as he 
called the reeking outhouse which he shared with the cat and the garden tools, 
served him also as a sounding-box: and every morning he hummed contentedly one 
of his favourite songs: O, TWINE ME A BOWER or BLUE EYES AND GOLDEN HAIR or THE 
GROVES OF BLARNEY while the grey and blue coils of smoke rose slowly from his 
pipe and vanished in the pure air. 

He could hear the cries of the fellows on the playgrounds. And the day was 
going on in the college just as if he were there. His fingers found a pencil 
and then a cigarette packet. He lay back and, tearing open the packet, placed 
the last cigarette on the window ledge and began to write out the stanzas of 
the villanelle in small neat letters on the rough cardboard surface. 

Having written them out he lay back on the lumpy pillow, murmuring them again. 
His thoughts were running another way. I used to spend money on them right 
enough,” he added, in a convincing tone, as if he was conscious of being 
disbelieved. 

But Lenehan could well believe it; he nodded gravely. 

“True bill,” said Mr Kernan, equally gravely. 

“What is it?” asked Gabriel, smiling at her solemn manner. 

“Who is G. , respectfully solicits the favour of your vote and influence at 
the coming election in the Royal Exchange Ward. To the right sat old Michael 
Grimes, the owner of three pawnbroker’s shops, and Dan Hogan’s nephew, who 
was up for the job in the Town Clerk’s office. At the end of the walk he 
halted before turning and raised his eyes. School and home seemed to recede 
from us and their influences upon us seemed to wane. 

We crossed the Liffey in the ferryboat, paying our toll to be transported in 
the company of two labourers and a little Jew with a bag. Then she thought what 
else would she buy: she wanted to buy something really nice. They would be sure 
to have plenty of apples and nuts. It was hard to know what to buy and all she 
could think of was cake. She decided to buy some plumcake but Downes’s 
plumcake had not enough almond icing on top of it so she went over to a shop in 
Henry Street. We’ll be coming back. My wife will be delighted to meet you. 
Come away. 

Cranly looked at him for a few moments and asked: 

--Now? 

--Yes, now, Stephen said. 

“I am a little,” she answered. I give them monthly examinations to see that 
they are profiting by my tuition. 

He also tapped the portfolio and coughed gently and smiled. Then, just as the 
chain was about to start again, she stood on tiptoe and whispered into his ear: 

“West Briton!” 

When the lancers were over Gabriel went away to a remote corner of the room 
where Freddy Malins’ mother was sitting. She was a stout feeble old woman 
with white hair. The moon was blood-red. The firmament was as a scroll rolled 
away. You could do nothing in Dublin. He had emerged from a two years' spell of 
revery to find himself in the midst of a new scene, every event and figure of 
which affected him intimately, disheartened him or allured and, whether 
alluring or disheartening, filled him always with unrest and bitter thoughts. 
All the leisure which his school life left him was passed in the company of 
subversive writers whose jibes and violence of speech set up a ferment in his 
brain before they passed out of it into his crude writings. 

The essay was for him the chief labour of his week and every Tuesday, as he 
marched from home to the school, he read his fate in the incidents of the way, 
pitting himself against some figure ahead of him and quickening his pace to 
outstrip it before a certain goal was reached or planting his steps 
scrupulously in the spaces of the patchwork of the pathway and telling himself 
that he would be first and not first in the weekly essay. 

--I'll tell him tomorrow, said Boland. 

--Here, catch hold of this heretic, Heron called out. You're a born sneerer, 
Stevie. They were only talking and laughing. Then Jack Lawton cracked his 
fingers and Father Arnall looked at his copybook and said: 

--Right. Bravo Lancaster! The red rose wins. Come on now, York! Forge ahead! 

Jack Lawton looked over from his side. Every day there was something in the 
paper about it. To discover the mode of life or of art whereby your spirit 
could express itself in unfettered freedom. The voice of the director urging 
upon him the proud claims of the church and the mystery and power of the 
priestly office repeated itself idly in his memory. He longed to recall to her 
those moments, to make her forget the years of their dull existence together 
and remember only their moments of ecstasy. Her eyes had called him and his 
soul had leaped at the call. To live, to err, to fall, to triumph, to recreate 
life out of life! A wild angel had appeared to him, the angel of mortal youth 
and beauty, an envoy from the fair courts of life, to throw open before him in 
an instant of ecstasy the gates of all the ways of error and glory. A sin, an 
instant of folly and weakness, drove Adam and Eve out of Eden and brought death 
and suffering into the world. He had simply taken advantage of Polly’s youth 
and inexperience: that was evident. The question was: What reparation would he 
make? 

There must be reparation made in such cases. 

--Don't argue with him, Dixon, Cranly said brutally. Don't talk to him or look 
at him. 

In a dream he fell asleep. In a dream he rose and saw that it was morning. A 
troubled night of dreams. Want to get them off my chest. 

A long curving gallery. From the floor ascend pillars of dark vapours. It is 
peopled by the images of fabulous kings, set in stone. Their hands are folded 
upon their knees in token of weariness and their eyes are darkened for the 
errors of men go up before them for ever as dark vapours. 

Strange figures advance as from a cave. They are not as tall as men. However, 
he said that Mrs Kearney might have taken the _artistes_ into consideration. 
The stewards and the secretaries debated hotly as to what should be done when 
the interval came. The deep low collar and the Eton jacket made him feel queer 
and oldish: and that morning when his mother had brought him down to the 
parlour, dressed for mass, his father had cried. “Is he coming down, 
Gretta?” 

Gabriel heard his wife answer yes and saw her come down towards them. He longed 
to ascend through the roof and fly away to another country where he would never 
hear again of his trouble, and yet a force pushed him downstairs step by step. 

He went heavily upstairs until he came to the second landing, where a door bore 
a brass plate with the inscription _Mr Alleyne_. Here he halted, puffing with 
labour and vexation, and knocked. The shrill voice cried: 

“Come in!” 

The man entered Mr Alleyne’s room. And every fellow had said that it was 
unfair, even the fellow out of second of grammar who had said that about the 
senate and the Roman people. 

--We go to the house of God, Mr Casey said, in all humility to pray to our 
Maker and not to hear election addresses. 

--It is religion, Dante said again. The cabbage began to deposit a cold white 
grease on his plate. The girl came over to him to ask was his dinner not 
properly cooked. He said it was very good and ate a few mouthfuls of it with 
difficulty. Then he paid his bill and went out. 

He walked along quickly through the November twilight, his stout hazel stick 
striking the ground regularly, the fringe of the buff _Mail_ peeping out of a 
side-pocket of his tight reefer overcoat. Gabriel smiled at the three syllables 
she had given his surname and glanced at her. Then I looked back at him 
again--taking my time, you know. Now, won’t you have a little something 
before you go?” 

“I don’t mind,” said Mr Hendrick. 

The two men went along some tortuous passages and up a dark staircase and came 
to a secluded room where one of the stewards was uncorking bottles for a few 
gentlemen. I suppose we’d better open the ball. We can scut the whole hour. 
And when two constabulary men had come into sight round a bend in the gloomy 
road he had broken off his prayer to whistle loudly an air from the last 
pantomime. 

He began to beat the frayed end of his ashplant against the base of a pillar. 
Had Cranly not heard him? Yet he could wait. 

--All, God! All, all! 

A messenger came to the door to say that confessions were being heard in the 
chapel. The corridors were darkly lit and the chapel was darkly lit. The man 
went up by the houses until he reached the door of the office, wondering 
whether he could finish his copy in time. You can't play the saint on me any 
more, that's one sure five. The dark damp night was coming and he longed to 
spend it in the bars, drinking with his friends amid the glare of gas and the 
clatter of glasses. Why did he say he knew that trick? 

--Lazy idle little loafer! cried the prefect of studies. 

--Try Leopardstown! said a voice from the bench behind. Patience. 

A tall figure came down the aisle and the penitents stirred; and at the last 
moment, glancing up swiftly, he saw a long grey beard and the brown habit of a 
capuchin. The priest entered the box and was hidden. He ate his dinner with 
surly appetite and when the meal was over and the grease-strewn plates lay 
abandoned on the table, he rose and went to the window, clearing the thick scum 
from his mouth with his tongue and licking it from his lips. 

“Listen to me,” said Mr Henchy. “Many’s the good man before now drank 
out of the bottle. ” 

“Anyway, it’s better than nothing,” said Mr O’Connor. 

“He told me: ‘What do you think of a Lord Mayor of Dublin sending out for a 
pound of chops for his dinner? How’s that for high living?’ says he. Some 
weeks Jack Lawton got the card for first and some weeks he got the card for 
first. 

--All are taking expulsion except Corrigan, Athy answered. Some died. Yes. His 
face was handsome and his body was strong and hard. He had spoken of a mother's 
love. 

He drew forth a phrase from his treasure and spoke it softly to himself: 

--A day of dappled seaborne clouds. The clouds were drifting above him silently 
and silently the seatangle was drifting below him and the grey warm air was 
still and a new wild life was singing in his veins. 

“Someone you were in love with?” he asked ironically. The blackest 
protestant in the land would not speak the language I have heard this evening. 
The gang fell asunder and there were no more nightly forays or battles on the 
rocks. Stephen sometimes went round with the car which delivered the evening 
milk and these chilly drives blew away his memory of the filth of the cowyard 
and he felt no repugnance at seeing the cow hairs and hayseeds on the milkman's 
coat. The old man watched him attentively and then, taking up the piece of 
cardboard again, began to fan the fire slowly while his companion smoked. 

“Ah, yes,” he said, continuing, “it’s hard to know what way to bring up 
children. She would give him neither money nor food nor house-room; and so he 
was obliged to enlist himself as a sheriff’s man. You see I’m over here 
with another fellow, clever young chap he is too, and we arranged to go to a 
little card-party. Only for that. . . But the astonishing thing is this. Not at 
all. Jimmy, under generous influences, felt the buried zeal of his father wake 
to life within him: he aroused the torpid Routh at last. Lynch was right. . . . 
and they’re nothing else. Mr Alleyne would never give him an hour’s rest; 
his life would be a hell to him. He had a brave manner of coming up to a party 
of them in a bar and of holding himself nimbly at the borders of the company 
until he was included in a round. They were all beginning to feel mellow. 
Farrington was just standing another round when Weathers came back. My wife 
will be delighted to meet you. We can have a little music and----” 

“Thanks awfully, old chap,” said Ignatius Gallaher, “I’m sorry we 
didn’t meet earlier. But I must leave tomorrow night. He looked down the 
slope and, at the base, in the shadow of the wall of the Park, he saw some 
human figures lying. Those venal and furtive loves filled him with despair. I 
am and I know I am. 

--Try to be one of us, repeated Davin. Why don't you learn Irish? Why did you 
drop out of the league class after the first lesson? 

--You know one reason why, answered Stephen. 

--O certainly, said the director. For the cloister it is all right but for the 
street I really think it would be better to do away with it, don't you? 

--It must be troublesome, I imagine. 

--Of course it is, of course. She had been made awkward by her not wishing to 
receive the news in too cavalier a fashion or to seem to have connived and 
Polly had been made awkward not merely because allusions of that kind always 
made her awkward but also because she did not wish it to be thought that in her 
wise innocence she had divined the intention behind her mother’s tolerance. 

Mrs Mooney glanced instinctively at the little gilt clock on the mantelpiece as 
soon as she had become aware through her revery that the bells of George’s 
Church had stopped ringing. It was seventeen minutes past eleven: she would 
have lots of time to have the matter out with Mr Doran and then catch short 
twelve at Marlborough Street. The crowd brought us together. They were both 
well dressed, stout and complacent and they brought a breath of opulence among 
the company. 

Mrs Kearney brought her daughter over to them, and talked to them amiably. 

--A bloody ape, Cranly repeated with emphasis, and a blasphemous bloody ape! 

Temple stood up and, pushing past Cranly, addressed Glynn: 

--That phrase you said now, he said, is from the new testament about suffer the 
children to come to me. The mimic warfare of the evening became at last as 
wearisome to me as the routine of school in the morning because I wanted real 
adventures to happen to myself. But real adventures, I reflected, do not happen 
to people who remain at home: they must be sought abroad. Why, by God, they 
wouldn't be seen dead in a ten-acre field with them. It was his own name that 
he should have made fun of if he wanted to make fun. First of all it had been 
an excitement for her to have a fellow and then she had begun to like him. She 
glanced at him once or twice and, when the party was leaving the room, she 
brushed against his chair and said _“O, pardon!”_ in a London accent. He 
watched her leave the room in the hope that she would look back at him, but he 
was disappointed. He cursed his want of money and cursed all the rounds he had 
stood, particularly all the whiskies and Apollinaris which he had stood to 
Weathers. If there was one thing that he hated it was a sponge. He was so angry 
that he lost count of the conversation of his friends. 

When Paddy Leonard called him he found that they were talking about feats of 
strength. Weathers was showing his biceps muscle to the company and boasting so 
much that the other two had called on Farrington to uphold the national honour. 

--I wouldn't, said Heron, damn me if I would. 





Polly sat for a little time on the side of the bed, crying. Then she dried her 
eyes and went over to the looking-glass. She dipped the end of the towel in the 
water-jug and refreshed her eyes with the cool water. 

Some instinct, waking at these memories, stronger than education or piety, 
quickened within him at every near approach to that life, an instinct subtle 
and hostile, and armed him against acquiescence. At last, when he could clap no 
more, he stood up suddenly and hurried across the room to Aunt Julia whose hand 
he seized and held in both his hands, shaking it when words failed him or the 
catch in his voice proved too much for him. She brought them up to his bedroom, 
the air of which was impregnated with a personal odour, and gave them chairs at 
the fire. 

“That’s a nice lady!” he said. 

--Butter you up! said Brother Michael. 

He saw him lift his hand towards the people and heard him say in a loud voice 
of sorrow over the waters: 

--He is dead. Ay. And let the dead marry the dead. Orchestra played O WILLIE, 
WE HAVE MISSED YOU. ” 

“Good-night, Mr D’Arcy. I won’t have him annoyed. ” 

Seeing that all were ready to start she shepherded them to the door, where 
good-night was said: 

“Well, good-night, Aunt Kate, and thanks for the pleasant evening. Yes. I 
think I know him. ” 

“Lovely voice, lovely voice!” said Aunt Kate. 

As the piano had twice begun the prelude to the first figure Mary Jane led her 
recruits quickly from the room. How melancholy it was! Could he, too, write 
like that, express the melancholy of his soul in verse? There were so many 
things he wanted to describe: his sensation of a few hours before on Grattan 
Bridge, for example. Mr Kernan seemed to be weighing something in his mind. 
After a rather long pause he announced: 



THE DEATH OF PARNELL _6th October_ 1891 

He cleared his throat once or twice and then began to recite: 



He is dead. Orchestra played O WILLIE, WE HAVE MISSED YOU. 

Stephen pointed to a basket which a butcher's boy had slung inverted on his 
head. 

As he stood silent in the middle of the room she came over to him and embraced 
him gaily and gravely. 

“I know that game,” he said, “and it’s a mug’s game. He answered the 
question, therefore, as if Mr Kernan had asked it. ” 

“You’d better speak to Mr Fitzpatrick,” said Mr Holohan distantly. 

“I don’t know anything about Mr Fitzpatrick,” repeated Mrs Kearney. 

The noise in the auditorium had risen to a clamour when Mr Fitzpatrick burst 
into the room, followed by Mr Holohan, who was panting. The clapping and 
stamping in the hall were punctuated by whistling. Mr Fitzpatrick held a few 
banknotes in his hand. 

“Good-night, Dan,” he said gaily. 

When the cab drew up before the hotel, Gabriel jumped out and, in spite of Mr 
Bartell D’Arcy’s protest, paid the driver. He gave the man a shilling over 
his fare. His evenings were spent either before his landlady’s piano or 
roaming about the outskirts of the city. Now, at the name of the fabulous 
artificer, he seemed to hear the noise of dim waves and to see a winged form 
flying above the waves and slowly climbing the air. 

During the first part of the summer in Blackrock uncle Charles was Stephen's 
constant companion. 

--I know you are poor, he said. 

While he was sitting helplessly on the side of the bed in shirt and trousers 
she tapped lightly at his door and entered. 

The light and noise of the bar held him at the doorways for a few moments. 

“Tell me, John,” said Mr O’Connor, lighting his cigarette with another 
pasteboard card. 

“Hm?” 

“What he is exactly?” 

“Ask me an easier one,” said Mr Henchy. 

Mr Hynes sat on the side of the table near Mr Lyons but said nothing. 

“I’m so sorry,” she continued, “that I’ve nothing in the house to 
offer you. 

Fleming moved heavily out of his place and knelt between the two last benches. 
” 

He took the remark as an invitation to talk. I understand it so. The world, it 
seems, is drearier than even you, Lynch, imagined. For my esthetic. It leads 
you out of the maze into a new gaudy lecture-room where MacCann, with one hand 
on THE ORIGIN OF SPECIES and the other hand on the new testament, tells you 
that you admired the great flanks of Venus because you felt that she would bear 
you burly offspring and admired her great breasts because you felt that she 
would give good milk to her children and yours. 

--Then MacCann is a sulphur-yellow liar, said Lynch energetically. 

--There remains another way out, said Stephen, laughing. She _was_ a little 
vulgar; sometimes she said “I seen” and “If I had’ve known. ” But 
what would grammar matter if he really loved her? He could not make up his mind 
whether to like her or despise her for what she had done. He could not have 
carried on a comedy of deception with her; he could not have lived with her 
openly. He had done what seemed to him best. How was he to blame? Now that she 
was gone he understood how lonely her life must have been, sitting night after 
night alone in that room. The middle of the room was occupied by two square 
tables placed end to end, and on these Aunt Julia and the caretaker were 
straightening and smoothing a large cloth. On the sideboard were arrayed dishes 
and plates, and glasses and bundles of knives and forks and spoons. The top of 
the closed square piano served also as a sideboard for viands and sweets. And 
one day Boyle had said that an elephant had two tuskers instead of two tusks 
and that was why he was called Tusker Boyle but some fellows called him Lady 
Boyle because he was always at his nails, paring them. The unjust He casts from 
Him, crying in His offended majesty: DEPART FROM ME, YE CURSED, INTO 
EVERLASTING FIRE WHICH WAS PREPARED FOR THE DEVIL AND HIS ANGELS. O, what agony 
then for the miserable sinners! Friend is torn apart from friend, children are 
torn from their parents, husbands from their wives. The poor sinner holds out 
his arms to those who were dear to him in this earthly world, to those whose 
simple piety perhaps he made a mock of, to those who counselled him and tried 
to lead him on the right path, to a kind brother, to a loving sister, to the 
mother and father who loved him so dearly. But it is too late: the just turn 
away from the wretched damned souls which now appear before the eyes of all in 
their hideous and evil character. O you hypocrites, O, you whited sepulchres, O 
you who present a smooth smiling face to the world while your soul within is a 
foul swamp of sin, how will it fare with you in that terrible day? 

And this day will come, shall come, must come: the day of death and the day of 
judgement. Death is certain. . 

But delirium passes. He echoed her phrase, applying it to himself: _“What am 
I to do?”_ The instinct of the celibate warned him to hold back. My wife will 
be delighted to meet you. ” 

“To take a pick itself,” said Mary Jane, “after all your dancing. ” 

“I really couldn’t,” said Miss Ivors. She was a frank-mannered talkative 
young lady, with a freckled face and prominent brown eyes. 

--Baldhead, Cranly repeated, sucking at a crevice in his teeth. As he passed 
Lenehan took off his cap and, after about ten seconds, Corley returned a salute 
to the air. 

That is horse piss and rotted straw, he thought. 

--But you have not answered my question, said Lynch. 

--But we are just now in a mental world, Stephen continued. 

“Pope Leo, you know, was a great scholar and a poet. 

--And who is the best poet, Heron? asked Boland. 

--Will you? said Stephen. 

--And not to have any one person, Cranly said, who would be more than a friend, 
more even than the noblest and truest friend a man ever had. . Ah! WITHOUT A 
POSSIBILITY OF EVER APPROACHING NEARER. That's heresy. 

Stephen murmured: 

--I meant WITHOUT A POSSIBILITY OF EVER REACHING. 

It was a submission and Mr Tate, appeased, folded up the essay and passed it 
across to him, saying: 

--O. . . . . . . ” 





CLAY 

THE matron had given her leave to go out as soon as the women’s tea was over 
and Maria looked forward to her evening out. 

He walked along quickly through the November twilight, his stout hazel stick 
striking the ground regularly, the fringe of the buff _Mail_ peeping out of a 
side-pocket of his tight reefer overcoat. I could interpret these signs. When 
he was midway through his dinner I asked him to give me the money to go to the 
bazaar. I allowed the two pennies to fall against the sixpence in my pocket. I 
heard a voice call from one end of the gallery that the light was out. The 
kitchen was spick and span: the cook said you could see yourself in the big 
copper boilers. The fire was nice and bright and on one of the side-tables were 
four very big barmbracks. These barmbracks seemed uncut; but if you went closer 
you would see that they had been cut into long thick even slices and were ready 
to be handed round at tea. Maria had cut them herself. 

Maria was a very, very small person indeed but she had a very long nose and a 
very long chin. Then Ginger Mooney lifted up her mug of tea and proposed 
Maria’s health while all the other women clattered with their mugs on the 
table, and said she was sorry she hadn’t a sup of porter to drink it in. And 
Maria laughed again till the tip of her nose nearly met the tip of her chin and 
till her minute body nearly shook itself asunder because she knew that Mooney 
meant well though, of course, she had the notions of a common woman. She had 
married her father’s foreman and opened a butcher’s shop near Spring 
Gardens. He watched the scene and thought of life; and (as always happened when 
he thought of life) he became sad. Gabriel, feeling now how vain it would be to 
try to lead her whither he had purposed, caressed one of her hands and said, 
also sadly: 

“And what did he die of so young, Gretta? Consumption, was it?” 

“I think he died for me,” she answered. Dante said: 

--Nice language for any catholic to use! 

--Mrs Riordan, I appeal to you, said Mrs Dedalus, to let the matter drop now. 
Education is all very fine and large. . . . _ Kindly attend to what I say and 
not to what _Mr Shelley says, sir_. You have always some excuse or another for 
shirking work. 

--Broke? What is this I hear? What is this? Your name is! said the prefect of 
studies. Broke my glasses! An old schoolboy trick! Out with your hand this 
moment! 

Stephen closed his eyes and held out in the air his trembling hand with the 
palm upwards. He felt the prefect of studies touch it for a moment at the 
fingers to straighten it and then the swish of the sleeve of the soutane as the 
pandybat was lifted to strike. A hot burning stinging tingling blow like the 
loud crack of a broken stick made his trembling hand crumple together like a 
leaf in the fire: and at the sound and the pain scalding tears were driven into 
his eyes. It was too much for him. I’d take the stick to his back and beat 
him while I could stand over him--as I done many a time before. It would be 
nice getting better slowly. 

Gabriel knitted his brows and said, as if he were slightly angered: 

“It’s nothing very wonderful but Gretta thinks it very funny because she 
says the word reminds her of Christy Minstrels. ” 

“But tell me, Gabriel,” said Aunt Kate, with brisk tact. She knew what 
_artistes_ should go into capitals and what _artistes_ should go into small 
type. She knew that the first tenor would not like to come on after Mr 
Meade’s comic turn. To keep the audience continually diverted she slipped the 
doubtful items in between the old favourites. Mr Holohan called to see her 
every day to have her advice on some point. She was invariably friendly and 
advising--homely, in fact. . . . ” 

He began to puff at his pipe, no doubt arranging his opinion in his mind. You 
would not write your name in pencil across the hypotenuse of a right-angled 
triangle. 

--No, said Lynch, give me the hypotenuse of the Venus of Praxiteles. 

--Static therefore, said Stephen. 

--You know, he said, you can ask that riddle another way. If he might use the 
metaphor, he said, he was their spiritual accountant; and he wished each and 
every one of his hearers to open his books, the books of his spiritual life, 
and see if they tallied accurately with conscience. Just as in dead bodies 
worms are engendered by putrefaction, so in the souls of the lost there arises 
a perpetual remorse from the putrefaction of sin, the sting of conscience, the 
worm, as Pope Innocent the Third calls it, of the triple sting. The first sting 
inflicted by this cruel worm will be the memory of past pleasures. O what a 
dreadful memory will that be! In the lake of all-devouring flame the proud king 
will remember the pomps of his court, the wise but wicked man his libraries and 
instruments of research, the lover of artistic pleasures his marbles and 
pictures and other art treasures, he who delighted in the pleasures of the 
table his gorgeous feasts, his dishes prepared with such delicacy, his choice 
wines; the miser will remember his hoard of gold, the robber his ill-gotten 
wealth, the angry and revengeful and merciless murderers their deeds of blood 
and violence in which they revelled, the impure and adulterous the unspeakable 
and filthy pleasures in which they delighted. They will remember all this and 
loathe themselves and their sins. His confession would be long, long. Everybody 
in the chapel would know then what a sinner he had been. Stephen felt the skin 
tingle and glow slightly and almost painlessly; and, bowing submissively, as if 
to meet his companion's jesting mood, began to recite the CONFITEOR. The 
episode ended well, for both Heron and Wallis laughed indulgently at the 
irreverence. 

The confession came only from Stephen's lips and, while they spoke the words, a 
sudden memory had carried him to another scene called up, as if by magic, at 
the moment when he had noted the faint cruel dimples at the corners of Heron's 
smiling lips and had felt the familiar stroke of the cane against his calf and 
had heard the familiar word of admonition: 

--Admit. 

--No. 

Mr Dedalus dropped his coat-tails and went over to the sideboard. He brought 
forth a great stone jar of whisky from the locker and filled the decanter 
slowly, bending now and then to see how much he had poured in. 

“Teddy will have all the cabs in Dublin out,” he said. 

“That’s forfeit,” said Mahony. The man, however, only smiled. 

--Tuition! said Cranly rudely. 

A wave of yet more tender joy escaped from his heart and went coursing in warm 
flood along his arteries. Like the tender fire of stars moments of their life 
together, that no one knew of or would ever know of, broke upon and illumined 
his memory. A heliotrope envelope was lying beside his breakfast-cup and he was 
caressing it with his hand. He bent down and asked her was there a chapel near. 
He was angry with himself for being young and the prey of restless foolish 
impulses, angry also with the change of fortune which was reshaping the world 
about him into a vision of squalor and insincerity. Yet his anger lent nothing 
to the vision. He chronicled with patience what he saw, detaching himself from 
it and tasting its mortifying flavour in secret. 

He was sitting on the backless chair in his aunt's kitchen. A group of his 
brothers and sisters was sitting round the table. Then he asked uncle Charles 
was it tender. Uncle Charles could not speak because his mouth was full; but he 
nodded that it was. Gretta caught a dreadful cold. His mother put on the 
oilsheet. That had the queer smell. 

His mother had a nicer smell than his father. No, I treat you as your 
grandfather treated me when I was a young chap. You've had a fine long holiday. 

--O, I'm sure he'll work very hard now, said Mrs Dedalus, especially when he 
has Maurice with him. She glanced at him once or twice and, when the party was 
leaving the room, she brushed against his chair and said _“O, pardon!”_ in 
a London accent. Few fellows had talents like his and fewer still could remain 
unspoiled by such success. Gallaher’s heart was in the right place and he had 
deserved to win. To begin with she had all the weight of social opinion on her 
side: she was an outraged mother. ” 

After the break-up at home the boys had got her that position in the _Dublin by 
Lamplight_ laundry, and she liked it. He leaned against the lamp-post and kept 
his gaze fixed on the 

His mind became active again. . 

Help! 

He flung the blankets from him madly to free his face and neck. He wore a round 
hat of hard black felt. His face, shining with raindrops, had the appearance of 
damp yellow cheese save where two rosy spots indicated the cheekbones. He 
opened his very long mouth suddenly to express disappointment and at the same 
time opened wide his very bright blue eyes to express pleasure and surprise. 

“O Father Keon!” said Mr Henchy, jumping up from his chair. “Is that you? 
Come in!” 

“O, no, no, no!” said Father Keon quickly, pursing his lips as if he were 
addressing a child. A kinder note than he had intended went into his voice. ” 

“It takes Teddy to find out the really good things,” said Mr Browne 
familiarly to the table. The mechanic and the two work-girls examined him point 
by point before resuming their conversation in a subdued voice. He thought that 
in her eyes he would ascend to an angelical stature; and, as he attached the 
fervent nature of his companion more and more closely to him, he heard the 
strange impersonal voice which he recognised as his own, insisting on the 
soul’s incurable loneliness. We cannot give ourselves, it said: we are our 
own. But the memory of Corley’s slowly revolving head calmed him somewhat: he 
was sure Corley would pull it off all right. Here, Stephen, show me your plate, 
old chap. You've had a fine long holiday. I feel a ton better since I landed 
again in dear dirty Dublin. Beyond the river he saw a goods train winding out 
of Kingsbridge Station, like a worm with a fiery head winding through the 
darkness, obstinately and laboriously. It passed slowly out of sight; but still 
he heard in his ears the laborious drone of the engine reiterating the 
syllables of her name. He was not straight-laced, but he could not forget that 
Mr M’Coy had recently made a crusade in search of valises and portmanteaus to 
enable Mrs M’Coy to fulfil imaginary engagements in the country. 

The rain fell faster. Faster and faster he hurried on through the gloom 
excitedly. He bumped his elbow against the door at the end and, hurrying down 
the staircase, walked quickly through the two corridors and out into the air. 
He was alone. He was unheeded, happy and near to the wild heart of life. 

She was about to explore another life with Frank. Frank was very kind, manly, 
open-hearted. She was to go away with him by the night-boat to be his wife and 
to live with him in Buenos Ayres where he had a home waiting for her. 

Mr Casey, freeing his arms from his holders, suddenly bowed his head on his 
hands with a sob of pain. His body shook with a palsy of fright and in shame 
and rage he felt the scalding cry come from his throat and the scalding tears 
falling out of his eyes and down his flaming cheeks. 

--Kneel down, cried the prefect of studies. Broke my glasses! An old schoolboy 
trick! Out with your hand this moment! 

Stephen closed his eyes and held out in the air his trembling hand with the 
palm upwards. He felt the prefect of studies touch it for a moment at the 
fingers to straighten it and then the swish of the sleeve of the soutane as the 
pandybat was lifted to strike. A hot burning stinging tingling blow like the 
loud crack of a broken stick made his trembling hand crumple together like a 
leaf in the fire: and at the sound and the pain scalding tears were driven into 
his eyes. 

Glynn coughed and said gently, holding back with difficulty the nervous titter 
in his voice and moving his umbrella at every word: 

--And, as you remark, if it is thus, I ask emphatically whence comes this 
thusness. 

--Because the church is cruel like all old sinners, Temple said. He's taking 
pure mathematics and I'm taking constitutional history. Royal persons, 
favourites, intriguers, bishops, passed like mute phantoms behind their veil of 
names. All had died: all had been judged. What did it profit a man to gain the 
whole world if he lost his soul? At last he had understood: and human life lay 
around him, a plain of peace whereon ant-like men laboured in brotherhood, 
their dead sleeping under quiet mounds. The elbow of his companion touched him 
and his heart was touched: and when he spoke to answer a question of his master 
he heard his own voice full of the quietude of humility and contrition. 

His soul sank back deeper into depths of contrite peace, no longer able to 
suffer the pain of dread, and sending forth, as he sank, a faint prayer. Ah 
yes, he would still be spared; he would repent in his heart and be forgiven; 
and then those above, those in heaven, would see what he would do to make up 
for the past: a whole life, every hour of life. ” 

“I often heard he was one of the most intellectual men in Europe,” said Mr 
Power. 

“‘Course he is,” said Mr Kernan, “and a damned decent Orangeman too. 
Experience had embittered his heart against the world. A figure that had seemed 
to him by day demure and innocent came towards him by night through the winding 
darkness of sleep, her face transfigured by a lecherous cunning, her eyes 
bright with brutish joy. 

He turned away from her suddenly and set off across the strand. His cheeks were 
aflame; his body was aglow; his limbs were trembling. But he would not go to 
hell when he died; and the shaking would stop. A voice bade the boys in the 
dormitory good night. Mrs Kearney said nothing, but, as the mediocre items 
followed one another on the platform and the few people in the hall grew fewer 
and fewer, she began to regret that she had put herself to any expense for such 
a concert. There was something she didn’t like in the look of things and Mr 
Fitzpatrick’s vacant smile irritated her very much. Not true. God was 
almighty. God could call him now, call him as he sat at his desk, before he had 
time to be conscious of the summons. God had called him. He had a beautiful 
death, God be praised. ” 

“And everything. It was very big to think about everything and everywhere. 
Only God could do that. I wouldn’t like to face your journey home at this 
hour. 

The priest rose and, turning towards the altar, knelt upon the step before the 
tabernacle in the fallen gloom. He waited till all in the chapel had knelt and 
every least noise was still. He talked of writing a letter to the papers. 

“These yahoos coming up here,” he said, “think they can boss the people. 

--We go to the house of God, Mr Casey said, in all humility to pray to our 
Maker and not to hear election addresses. 

--It is religion, Dante said again. Lucifer, we are told, was a son of the 
morning, a radiant and mighty angel; yet he fell: he fell and there fell with 
him a third part of the host of heaven: he fell and was hurled with his 
rebellious angels into hell. 

Nor was that all. He’s as good as his word, anyhow. ” 

“There’s no tumblers,” said the old man. 

The car drove off towards Westmoreland Street. She was sure she would win. He 
was a serious young man, not rakish or loud-voiced like the others. If it had 
been Mr Sheridan or Mr Meade or Bantam Lyons her task would have been much 
harder. She did not think he would face publicity. All the lodgers in the house 
knew something of the affair; details had been invented by some. Besides, he 
had been employed for thirteen years in a great Catholic wine-merchant’s 
office and publicity would mean for him, perhaps, the loss of his job. He was 
condemned to death as a whiteboy. But he had a saying about our clerical 
friends, that he would never let one of them put his two feet under his 
mahogany. 

Dante broke in angrily: 

--If we are a priest-ridden race we ought to be proud of it! They are the apple 
of God's eye. . . . . . . . ?” 

“Some of these hillsiders and fenians are a bit too clever if you ask me,” 
said Mr Henchy. “Isn’t that fine? What?” 

Mr Crofton said that it was a very fine piece of writing. 





A MOTHER 

MR HOLOHAN, assistant secretary of the _Eire Abu_ Society, had been walking up 
and down Dublin for nearly a month, with his hands and pockets full of dirty 
pieces of paper, arranging about the series of concerts. 

As Mr Holohan was a novice in such delicate matters as the wording of bills and 
the disposing of items for a programme, Mrs Kearney helped him. 

He went once or twice with his mother to visit their relatives: and though they 
passed a jovial array of shops lit up and adorned for Christmas his mood of 
embittered silence did not leave him. Are you not weary of ardent ways? 

Above the flame the smoke of praise Goes up from ocean rim to rim. Tell no more 
of enchanted days. 



* * * * * 



What birds were they? He stood on the steps of the library to look at them, 
leaning wearily on his ashplant. They flew round and round the jutting shoulder 
of a house in Molesworth Street. Not far from the porch of the club a harpist 
stood in the roadway, playing to a little ring of listeners. He plucked at the 
wires heedlessly, glancing quickly from time to time at the face of each 
new-comer and from time to time, wearily also, at the sky. But an unresting 
doubt flew hither and thither before his mind. 

His ears were listening to these distant echoes amid the silence of the parlour 
when he became aware that the priest was addressing him in a different voice. 

--Thank you. 

--Good morning, everybody, said Stephen, smiling and kissing the tips of his 
fingers in adieu. 

The lane behind the terrace was waterlogged and as he went down it slowly, 
choosing his steps amid heaps of wet rubbish, he heard a mad nun screeching in 
the nuns' madhouse beyond the wall. It was like waves. Or the waves were 
talking among themselves as they rose and fell. And therefore the tongues about 
him had ceased their babble. Darkness was falling. 

Darkness falls from the air. Strange that it should come that very night to 
remind her of the promise to her mother, her promise to keep the home together 
as long as she could. 

The bell rang and then the classes began to file out of the rooms and along the 
corridors towards the refectory. He sat looking at the two prints of butter on 
his plate but could not eat the damp bread. The tablecloth was damp and limp. 
But he drank off the hot weak tea which the clumsy scullion, girt with a white 
apron, poured into his cup. He wondered whether the scullion's apron was damp 
too or whether all white things were cold and damp. Nasty Roche and Saurin 
drank cocoa that their people sent them in tins. They said they could not drink 
the tea; that it was hogwash. Their fathers were magistrates, the fellows said. 
The baritone was asked what did he think of Mrs Kearney’s conduct. He did not 
like to say anything. . ” 





AN ENCOUNTER 

IT was Joe Dillon who introduced the Wild West to us. We won't let it out. On 
the lines which he had fancied the moorings of an ark a few lanterns swung in 
the night breeze, flickering cheerlessly. He mounted the steps from the garden 
in haste, eager that some prey should not elude him, and forced his way through 
the crowd in the hall and past the two jesuits who stood watching the exodus 
and bowing and shaking hands with the visitors. He pushed onward nervously, 
feigning a still greater haste and faintly conscious of the smiles and stares 
and nudges which his powdered head left in its wake. Don't forget the turnips 
for me and my mate. 

Lynch gazed after him, his lip curling in slow scorn till his face resembled a 
devil's mask: 

--To think that that yellow pancake-eating excrement can get a good job, he 
said at length, and I have to smoke cheap cigarettes! 

They turned their faces towards Merrion Square and went for a little in 
silence. As they neared the alley Stephen could hear the thuds of the players' 
hands and the wet smacks of the ball and Davin's voice crying out excitedly at 
each stroke. Night after night I had passed the house (it was vacation time) 
and studied the lighted square of window: and night after night I had found it 
lighted in the same way, faintly and evenly. If he was dead, I thought, I would 
see the reflection of candles on the darkened blind for I knew that two candles 
must be set at the head of a corpse. Carry it out of the house on the shoulders 
of hirelings. Thrust it out of men's sight into a long hole in the ground, into 
the grave, to rot, to feed the mass of its creeping worms and to be devoured by 
scuttling plump-bellied rats. 

And while the friends were still standing in tears by the bedside the soul of 
the sinner was judged. A wave of fire swept through his body: the first. His 
white silk badge fluttered and fluttered as he worked at the next sum and heard 
Father Arnall's voice. 

--I sent for you today, Stephen, because I wished to speak to you on a very 
important subject. Once or twice the young lady glanced at me over her 
shoulder. The right side of the head had been injured in the fall. He had not 
yet fallen but he would fall silently, in an instant. The reporter called it a 
tragic death. I wondered at this for, as my uncle had said the night before, he 
had taught me a great deal. He had studied in the Irish college in Rome and he 
had taught me to pronounce Latin properly. Why? Do you know it?” 

“_The Lass of Aughrim_,” she repeated. “I couldn’t think of the name. A 
shock of pale hair lay on the forehead like a ruffled crest: the forehead was 
narrow and bony and a thin hooked nose stood out between the close-set 
prominent eyes which were light and inexpressive. The rivals were school 
friends. His inexplicable debts were a byword in his circle; he was a debonair 
young man. 

--Blast him, curse him! said Cranly broadly. Mr Alleyne flushed to the hue of a 
wild rose and his mouth twitched with a dwarf’s passion. He shook his fist in 
the man’s face till it seemed to vibrate like the knob of some electric 
machine: 

“You impertinent ruffian! You impertinent ruffian! I’ll make short work of 
you! Wait till you see! You’ll apologise to me for your impertinence or 
you’ll quit the office instanter! You’ll quit this, I’m telling you, or 
you’ll apologise to me!” 





He stood in a doorway opposite the office watching to see if the cashier would 
come out alone. He was happy and free; but he would not be anyway proud with 
Father Dolan. Write away. There was a pause of a few seconds: and then the 
piano was heard. 

Eileen had long white hands. One hand played in the bass the melody of _Silent, 
O Moyle_, while the other hand careered in the treble after each group of 
notes. The notes of the air sounded deep and full. 

The two young men walked up the street without speaking, the mournful music 
following them. We are an unfortunate priest-ridden race and always were and 
always will be till the end of the chapter. 

Uncle Charles shook his head, saying: 

--A bad business! A bad business! 

Mr Dedalus repeated: 

--A priest-ridden Godforsaken race! 

He pointed to the portrait of his grandfather on the wall to his right. O, we 
had a good walk, hadn't we, John? Yes. The exhausted loins are those of 
Elizabeth and Zacchary. Then he is the precursor. Item: he eats chiefly belly 
bacon and dried figs. Read locusts and wild honey. Also, when thinking of him, 
saw always a stern severed head or death mask as if outlined on a grey curtain 
or veronica. Decollation they call it in the gold. Puzzled for the moment by 
saint John at the Latin gate. His song is softer than the dew And he is come to 
visit you. 

O bend no more in revery When he at eventide is calling. She started to her 
feet and ran to the banisters. 

“Polly! Polly!” 

“Yes, mamma?” 

“Come down, dear. Mr Doran wants to speak to you. Never fear,” he said. 

Mr Dedalus went to the end of the table and said: 

--Now, Mrs Riordan, sit over. Now it was God's turn: and He was not to be 
hoodwinked or deceived. Every sin would then come forth from its lurking place, 
the most rebellious against the divine will and the most degrading to our poor 
corrupt nature, the tiniest imperfection and the most heinous atrocity. What 
did it avail then to have been a great emperor, a great general, a marvellous 
inventor, the most learned of the learned? All were as one before the judgement 
seat of God. 

It made him very tired to think that way. ” 

The boy came back with the corkscrew. The old man opened three bottles and was 
handing back the corkscrew when Mr Henchy said to the boy: 

“Would you like a drink, boy?” 

“If you please, sir,” said the boy. 

The old man opened another bottle grudgingly, and handed it to the boy. 

--Yes, yes, said Mr Dedalus. Who is the greatest writer, Dedalus? 

Stephen noted the mockery in the question and said: 

--Of prose do you mean? 

--Yes. 

--Newman, I think. 

--Is it Cardinal Newman? asked Boland. 

--You may keep your mouth shut, said Stephen, turning on him boldly. 

“Who knows?” he said, as they lifted their glasses. The three men pushed 
past the whining match-sellers at the door and formed a little party at the 
corner of the counter. He would seize a handful of grapes and sawdust or three 
or four American apples and thrust them generously into his grandnephew's hand 
while the shopman smiled uneasily; and, on Stephen's feigning reluctance to 
take them, he would frown and say: 

--Take them, sir. That's the real Ally Daly. 

Why did Mr Barrett in Clongowes call his pandybat a turkey? But Clongowes was 
far away: and the warm heavy smell of turkey and ham and celery rose from the 
plates and dishes and the great fire was banked high and red in the grate and 
the green ivy and red holly made you feel so happy and when dinner was ended 
the big plum pudding would be carried in, studded with peeled almonds and 
sprigs of holly, with bluish fire running around it and a little green flag 
flying from the top. But he got there. She said she was all alone in the house 
and that her husband had gone that morning to Queenstown with his sister to see 
her off. And all the time she was talking, Stevie, she had her eyes fixed on my 
face and she stood so close to me I could hear her breathing. When I handed her 
back the mug at last she took my hand to draw me in over the threshold and 
said: 'COME IN AND STAY THE NIGHT HERE. By God, I don't feel more than eighteen 
myself. Do you remember the night? Cranly lost his temper and began to talk 
about Wicklow bacon. He had learnt what little he knew of the laws of Latin 
verse from a ragged book written by a Portuguese priest. 

The Blessed Sacrament had been removed from the tabernacle and the first 
benches had been driven back so as to leave the dais of the altar and the space 
before it free. Let the dead bury the dead. 

Dublin was a new and complex sensation. Uncle Charles had grown so witless that 
he could no longer be sent out on errands and the disorder in settling in the 
new house left Stephen freer than he had been in Blackrock. In the beginning he 
contented himself with circling timidly round the neighbouring square or, at 
most, going half way down one of the side streets but when he had made a 
skeleton map of the city in his mind he followed boldly one of its central 
lines until he reached the customhouse. He passed unchallenged among the docks 
and along the quays wondering at the multitude of corks that lay bobbing on the 
surface of the water in a thick yellow scum, at the crowds of quay porters and 
the rumbling carts and the ill-dressed bearded policeman. 

His collar was unfastened and his necktie undone. He opened his eyes for an 
instant, sighed and closed them again. 

He could still leave the chapel. Four boys left the room; and he heard others 
passing down the corridor. A tremulous chill blew round his heart, no stronger 
than a little wind, and yet, listening and suffering silently, he seemed to 
have laid an ear against the muscle of his own heart, feeling it close and 
quail, listening to the flutter of its ventricles. 

No escape. I see, however, two ways out. Gabriel waited again and then, fearing 
that diffidence was about to conquer him, he said abruptly: 

“By the way, Gretta!” 

“What is it?” 

“You know that poor fellow Malins?” he said quickly. His prayer, addressed 
neither to God nor saint, began with a shiver, as the chilly morning breeze 
crept through the chink of the carriage door to his feet, and ended in a trail 
of foolish words which he made to fit the insistent rhythm of the train; and 
silently, at intervals of four seconds, the telegraph-poles held the galloping 
notes of the music between punctual bars. This furious music allayed his dread 
and, leaning against the windowledge, he let his eyelids close again. 

MacCann began to speak with fluent energy of the Tsar's rescript, of Stead, of 
general disarmament arbitration in cases of international disputes, of the 
signs of the times, of the new humanity and the new gospel of life which would 
make it the business of the community to secure as cheaply as possible the 
greatest possible happiness of the greatest possible number. Twelve, thirteen: 
for two came wheeling down from the upper sky. They were flying high and low 
but ever round and round in straight and curving lines and ever flying from 
left to right, circling about a temple of air. Their cry was shrill and clear 
and fine and falling like threads of silken light unwound from whirring spools. 

The inhuman clamour soothed his ears in which his mother's sobs and reproaches 
murmured insistently and the dark frail quivering bodies wheeling and 
fluttering and swerving round an airy temple of the tenuous sky soothed his 
eyes which still saw the image of his mother's face. As I did so I met the gaze 
of a pair of bottle-green eyes peering at me from under a twitching forehead. I 
turned my eyes away again. The two best out of three. The bell and the bird 
ceased; and the dull white light spread itself east and west, covering the 
world, covering the roselight in his heart. 

He bowed his head upon his hands, bidding his heart be meek and humble that he 
might be like those who knelt beside him and his prayer as acceptable as 
theirs. Stephen, who had read of Napoleon's plain style of dress, chose to 
remain unadorned and thereby heightened for himself the pleasure of taking 
counsel with his lieutenant before giving orders. The gang made forays into the 
gardens of old maids or went down to the castle and fought a battle on the 
shaggy weed-grown rocks, coming home after it weary stragglers with the stale 
odours of the foreshore in their nostrils and the rank oils of the seawrack 
upon their hands and in their hair. Her voice had a catch in it like her 
son’s and she stuttered slightly. She had been told that Freddy had come and 
that he was nearly all right. I’m only a stupid old woman and I wouldn’t 
presume to do such a thing. The radiance of which he speaks in the scholastic 
QUIDDITAS, the WHATNESS of a thing. You apprehend it as complex, multiple, 
divisible, separable, made up of its parts, the result of its parts and their 
sum, harmonious. That is CONSONANTIA. 

--Bull's eye again! said Lynch wittily. Tell me now what is CLARITAS and you 
win the cigar. 

--The connotation of the word, Stephen said, is rather vague. He wished his 
friends to think there had been some mistake, that Mr Harford and he had missed 
each other. His friends, who knew quite well Mr Harford’s manners in 
drinking, were silent. Then he asked: 

--How old are you, my child? 

--Sixteen, father. 

--Were they married women, my child? 

He did not know. . and thought how strange it was that the last three words 
began with the same letter. The chief clerk began to hurry Miss Parker, saying 
she would never have the letters typed in time for post. The man listened to 
the clicking of the machine for a few minutes and then set to work to finish 
his copy. The tirade continued: it was so bitter and violent that the man could 
hardly restrain his fist from descending upon the head of the manikin before 
him: 

“I know nothing about any other two letters,” he said stupidly. 

“_You--know--nothing_. Of course you know nothing,” said Mr Alleyne. 
“Tell me,” he added, glancing first for approval to the lady beside him, 
“do you take me for a fool? Do you think me an utter fool?” 

The man glanced from the lady’s face to the little egg-shaped head and back 
again; and, almost before he was aware of it, his tongue had found a felicitous 
moment: 

“I don’t think, sir,” he said, “that that’s a fair question to put to 
me. 

--Did you tell him that you had written home for a new pair? the rector asked. 

--Where I can, Stephen said. 

--And if you got nothing, would you rob? 

--You wish me to say, Stephen answered, that the rights of property are 
provisional, and that in certain circumstances it is not unlawful to rob. 
Everyone would act in that belief. So I will not make you that answer. Apply to 
the jesuit theologian, Juan Mariana de Talavera, who will also explain to you 
in what circumstances you may lawfully kill your king and whether you had 
better hand him his poison in a goblet or smear it for him upon his robe or his 
saddlebow. Ask me rather would I suffer others to rob me, or if they did, would 
I call down upon them what I believe is called the chastisement of the secular 
arm? 

--And would you? 

--I think, Stephen said, it would pain me as much to do so as to be robbed. 

--I see, Cranly said. Now that supper was coming near he began to think again 
about his speech and about the quotation. When he saw Freddy Malins coming 
across the room to visit his mother Gabriel left the chair free for him and 
retired into the embrasure of the window. I left the house in bad humour and 
walked slowly towards the school. When she came to the age of marriage she was 
sent out to many houses where her playing and ivory manners were much admired. 
She sat amid the chilly circle of her accomplishments, waiting for some suitor 
to brave it and offer her a brilliant life. Sometimes he caught himself 
listening to the sound of his own voice. She sang _I Dreamt that I Dwelt_, and 
when she came to the second verse she sang again: 



_I dreamt that I dwelt in marble halls With vassals and serfs at my side And of 
all who assembled within those walls That I was the hope and the pride. 

He was quite unconscious that he was the victim of a plot which his friends, Mr 
Cunningham, Mr M’Coy and Mr Power had disclosed to Mrs Kernan in the parlour. 
The idea had been Mr Power’s but its development was entrusted to Mr 
Cunningham. 

“O, I know about the infallibility of the Pope. ” 

“So he was,” said Mr Cunningham, “if not _the_ most so. Then I should 
have to like it also. 

Their minds, lately estranged, seemed suddenly to have been drawn closer, one 
to the other. You ask Hogan, my boy. 

The old man opened another bottle grudgingly, and handed it to the boy. ” He 
asked me where I was going and, when I had told him a second time he asked me 
did I know _The Arab’s Farewell to his Steed_. When I left the kitchen he was 
about to recite the opening lines of the piece to my aunt. 

I held a florin tightly in my hand as I strode down Buckingham Street towards 
the station. The ticket-collector saluted Jimmy; he was an old man: 

“Fine night, sir!” 

It was a serene summer night; the harbour lay like a darkened mirror at their 
feet. They proceeded towards it with linked arms, singing _Cadet Roussel_ in 
chorus, stamping their feet at every: 

_“Ho! Ho! Hohé, vraiment!”_ 

They got into a rowboat at the slip and made out for the American’s yacht. 
There was to be supper, music, cards. 

“I’ll get you a match,” said the old man. He’s a clever chap, too, with 
the pen. He had tried to spell out the headline for himself though he knew 
already what it was for it was the last of the book. 

It was queer that they had not given him any medicine. That came from the 
bottles on the shelves. At times he repeated lines to himself and this consoled 
him. You are His. The shock which had first attacked his stomach was now 
attacking his nerves. Beauty expressed by the artist cannot awaken in us an 
emotion which is kinetic or a sensation which is purely physical. It awakens, 
or ought to awaken, or induces, or ought to induce, an esthetic stasis, an 
ideal pity or an ideal terror, a stasis called forth, prolonged, and at last 
dissolved by what I call the rhythm of beauty. 

Stephen raised his cap as if in greeting. He also? Was there not a slight flush 
on Cranly's cheek? Or had it come forth at Temple's words? The light had waned. 
He could not see. He struck a match and, sheltering it in the shell of his 
hands, peered again into the mouth which Mr Kernan opened obediently. The 
swaying movement of the car brought the match to and from the opened mouth. 

A shaft of momentary anger flew through Stephen's mind at these indelicate 
allusions in the hearing of a stranger. For him there was nothing amusing in a 
girl's interest and regard. All day he had thought of nothing but their 
leave-taking on the steps of the tram at Harold's Cross, the stream of moody 
emotions it had made to course through him and the poem he had written about 
it. That’s human nature. He felt acutely the contrast between his own life 
and his friend’s and it seemed to him unjust. Gallaher was his inferior in 
birth and education. None of your modern trumpery. . . . over your boots, 
Gretta, isn’t it?” 

“Yes,” said Mrs Conroy. ” 

While Gabriel and Miss Daly exchanged plates of goose and plates of ham and 
spiced beef Lily went from guest to guest with a dish of hot floury potatoes 
wrapped in a white napkin. This was Mary Jane’s idea and she had also 
suggested apple sauce for the goose but Aunt Kate had said that plain roast 
goose without any apple sauce had always been good enough for her and she hoped 
she might never eat worse. Mary Jane waited on her pupils and saw that they got 
the best slices and Aunt Kate and Aunt Julia opened and carried across from the 
piano bottles of stout and ale for the gentlemen and bottles of minerals for 
the ladies. ” 

He made a circle in the air with his arm and paused. Then Mr Cunningham turned 
towards Mr Power and said casually: 

“On Thursday night, you said, Jack. ” 

“Thursday, yes,” said Mr Power. “The four of us together. That’s agreed 
now, isn’t it?” 

“Yes, that’s agreed,” said Ignatius Gallaher. ” 

Ignatius Gallaher in the act of drinking closed one eye expressively over the 
rim of his glass. 

“Well, you know,” said Mr M’Coy, “isn’t the photograph wonderful when 
you come to think of it?” 

“O, of course,” said Mr Power, “great minds can see things. Perhaps he 
ought not to have answered her like that. And you know what that word means? 
Not only to be separate from all others but to have not even one friend. People 
used to say that Ignatius Gallaher was wild. Of course, he did mix with a 
rakish set of fellows at that time, drank freely and borrowed money on all 
sides. On all sides distorted reflections of her image started from his memory: 
the flower girl in the ragged dress with damp coarse hair and a hoyden's face 
who had called herself his own girl and begged his handsel, the kitchen-girl in 
the next house who sang over the clatter of her plates, with the drawl of a 
country singer, the first bars of BY KILLARNEY'S LAKES AND FELLS, a girl who 
had laughed gaily to see him stumble when the iron grating in the footpath near 
Cork Hill had caught the broken sole of his shoe, a girl he had glanced at, 
attracted by her small ripe mouth, as she passed out of Jacob's biscuit 
factory, who had cried to him over her shoulder: 

--Do you like what you seen of me, straight hair and curly eyebrows? 

And yet he felt that, however he might revile and mock her image, his anger was 
also a form of homage. He had left the classroom in disdain that was not wholly 
sincere, feeling that perhaps the secret of her race lay behind those dark eyes 
upon which her long lashes flung a quick shadow. He had told himself bitterly 
as he walked through the streets that she was a figure of the womanhood of her 
country, a bat-like soul waking to the consciousness of itself in darkness and 
secrecy and loneliness, tarrying awhile, loveless and sinless, with her mild 
lover and leaving him to whisper of innocent transgressions in the latticed ear 
of a priest. 

The Blessed Sacrament had been removed from the tabernacle and the first 
benches had been driven back so as to leave the dais of the altar and the space 
before it free. Against the walls stood companies of barbells and Indian clubs; 
the dumbbells were piled in one corner: and in the midst of countless hillocks 
of gymnasium shoes and sweaters and singlets in untidy brown parcels there 
stood the stout leather-jacketed vaulting horse waiting its turn to be carried 
up on the stage and set in the middle of the winning team at the end of the 
gymnastic display. 

Stephen, though in deference to his reputation for essay writing he had been 
elected secretary to the gymnasium, had had no part in the first section of the 
programme but in the play which formed the second section he had the chief 
part, that of a farcical pedagogue. He had been cast for it on account of his 
stature and grave manners for he was now at the end of his second year at 
Belvedere and in number two. Then you can ask him questions on the catechism, 
Dedalus. I meant about the. . . nearly. He still bought a copy of _Reynolds’s 
Newspaper_ every week but he attended to his religious duties and for 
nine-tenths of the year lived a regular life. 

He had neither companions nor friends, church nor creed. He lived his spiritual 
life without any communion with others, visiting his relatives at Christmas and 
escorting them to the cemetery when they died. May God have mercy on him! 

He closed his eyes wearily and paused. Then Mr Cunningham turned towards Mr 
Power and said casually: 

“On Thursday night, you said, Jack. ” 

“Thursday, yes,” said Mr Power. “There used always to be crowds of 
Protestants in the chapel where Father Tom was preaching. ” 

“There’s not much difference between us,” said Mr M’Coy. 

Mr M’Coy had been at one time a tenor of some reputation. His wife, who had 
been a soprano, still taught young children to play the piano at low terms. His 
line of life had not been the shortest distance between two points and for 
short periods he had been driven to live by his wits. A lean student with olive 
skin and lank black hair thrust his face between the two, glancing from one to 
the other at each phrase and seeming to try to catch each flying phrase in his 
open moist mouth. His cheekbones also gave his face a harsh character; but 
there was no harshness in the eyes which, looking at the world from under their 
tawny eyebrows, gave the impression of a man ever alert to greet a redeeming 
instinct in others but often disappointed. He lived at a little distance from 
his body, regarding his own acts with doubtful side-glances. He had an odd 
autobiographical habit which led him to compose in his mind from time to time a 
short sentence about himself containing a subject in the third person and a 
predicate in the past tense. He never gave alms to beggars and walked firmly, 
carrying a stout hazel. 

He had been for many years cashier of a private bank in Baggot Street. Their 
cries reached me weakened and indistinct and, leaning my forehead against the 
cool glass, I looked over at the dark house where she lived. He was called 
Little Chandler because, though he was but slightly under the average stature, 
he gave one the idea of being a little man. 

--I don't know, I'm sure, said Mr Dedalus, smiling complacently. 

--Your father, said the little old man to Stephen, was the boldest flirt in the 
City of Cork in his day. We were down there at a meeting and after the meeting 
was over we had to make our way to the railway station through the crowd. Like 
illumined pearls the lamps shone from the summits of their tall poles upon the 
living texture below which, changing shape and hue unceasingly, sent up into 
the warm grey evening air an unchanging unceasing murmur. The eyes were 
melancholy as those of a monkey. 

--Good evening, gentlemen, said the stubble-grown monkeyish face. Mr Dedalus 
rooted with the carvers at the end of the dish and said: 

--There's a tasty bit here we call the pope's nose. He had coarse features, a 
blunt nose, a convex and receding brow, tumid and protruded lips. 

“Listen to me,” said Mr Henchy. 

He nodded curtly to Mr Hynes and sat down on the chair which the old man 
vacated. 

“Did you serve Aungier Street?” he asked Mr O’Connor. 

“I’m dry too,” said the old man. 

The new-comer surveyed the deplorable figure before him and then turned to the 
constable, saying: 

“It’s all right, constable. I’ll see him home. Please come and take me 
home. He took her to see _The Bohemian Girl_ and she felt elated as she sat in 
an unaccustomed little. 





ARABY 

NORTH RICHMOND STREET, being blind, was a quiet street except at the hour when 
the Christian Brothers’ School set the boys free. Against the walls stood 
companies of barbells and Indian clubs; the dumbbells were piled in one corner: 
and in the midst of countless hillocks of gymnasium shoes and sweaters and 
singlets in untidy brown parcels there stood the stout leather-jacketed 
vaulting horse waiting its turn to be carried up on the stage and set in the 
middle of the winning team at the end of the gymnastic display. 

Stephen, though in deference to his reputation for essay writing he had been 
elected secretary to the gymnasium, had had no part in the first section of the 
programme but in the play which formed the second section he had the chief 
part, that of a farcical pedagogue. He had been cast for it on account of his 
stature and grave manners for he was now at the end of his second year at 
Belvedere and in number two. 

A score of the younger boys in white knickers and singlets came pattering down 
from the stage, through the vestry and to the chapel. At the chapel, if you 
please!”_ When the lamp was lit he banged his fist on the table and shouted: 

“What’s for my dinner?” 

“I’m going. Aunt Kate was more vivacious. Her face, healthier than her 
sister’s, was all puckers and creases, like a shrivelled red apple, and her 
hair, braided in the same old-fashioned way, had not lost its ripe nut colour. 
The walls of the room were bare except for a copy of an election address. The 
confusion grew greater and the cabman was directed differently by Freddy Malins 
and Mr Browne, each of whom had his head out through a window of the cab. 
Freddy Malins clambered in after her and spent a long time settling her on the 
seat, Mr Browne helping him with advice. The battered silk hat was placed on 
the man’s head. I'm old enough to be his grandfather. And I am a grandfather, 
said the little old man to Stephen. 

Mr Tate withdrew his delving hand and spread out the essay. 

A hush fell on the class. He crossed the hall and took the corridor to the left 
which led to the physics theatre. The corridor was dark and silent but not 
unwatchful. Why did he feel that it was not unwatchful? Was it because he had 
heard that in Buck Whaley's time there was a secret staircase there? Or was the 
jesuit house extra-territorial and was he walking among aliens? The Ireland of 
Tone and of Parnell seemed to have receded in space. 

He could not grip the floor with his feet and sat heavily at his desk, opening 
one of his books at random and poring over it. I asked him why he had brought 
it and he told me he had brought it to have some gas with the birds. Mahony 
used slang freely, and spoke of Father Butler as Old Bunser. We waited on for a 
quarter of an hour more but still there was no sign of Leo Dillon. Mahony, at 
last, jumped down and said: 

“Come along. I knew Fatty’d funk it. It is a form: nothing else. Mr Alleyne 
would never give him an hour’s rest; his life would be a hell to him. I think 
he has a grand voice. 

“Can’t you tell us?” he said. 

--Do you disbelieve then? 

--I neither believe in it nor disbelieve in it, Stephen answered. 

--Many persons have doubts, even religious persons, yet they overcome them or 
put them aside, Cranly said. 

--And if you got nothing, would you rob? 

--You wish me to say, Stephen answered, that the rights of property are 
provisional, and that in certain circumstances it is not unlawful to rob. 
Everyone would act in that belief. So I will not make you that answer. Was it 
right to kiss his mother or wrong to kiss his mother? What did that mean, to 
kiss? You put your face up like that to say good night and then his mother put 
her face down. That was to kiss. Why did people do that with their two faces? 

Sitting in the study hall he opened the lid of his desk and changed the number 
pasted up inside from seventy-seven to seventy-six. 

It would be better to be in the study hall than out there in the cold. He kept 
his hands in the side pockets of his belted grey suit. Square feet. A squad of 
christian brothers was on its way back from the Bull and had begun to pass, two 
by two, across the bridge. Soon the whole bridge was trembling and resounding. 
The uncouth faces passed him two by two, stained yellow or red or livid by the 
sea, and, as he strove to look at them with ease and indifference, a faint 
stain of personal shame and commiseration rose to his own face. Then, resting 
his forehead against his hand, he leaned towards the grating and, with eyes 
still averted, spoke slowly. 

--Hold out! cried the prefect of studies. Any lazy idle loafers that want 
flogging in this class? 

He came to the middle of the class and saw Fleming on his knees. 

“Ah, poor James!” she said. 

While he was sitting helplessly on the side of the bed in shirt and trousers 
she tapped lightly at his door and entered. 

The light and noise of the bar held him at the doorways for a few moments. He 
looked about him, but his sight was confused by the shining of many red and 
green wine-glasses The bar seemed to him to be full of people and he felt that 
the people were observing him curiously. He glanced quickly to right and left 
(frowning slightly to make his errand appear serious), but when his sight 
cleared a little he saw that nobody had turned to look at him: and there, sure 
enough, was Ignatius Gallaher leaning with his back against the counter and his 
feet planted far apart. 

“Hallo, Tommy, old hero, here you are! What is it to be? What will you have? 
I’m taking whisky: better stuff than we get across the water. 

--He tells us in his homely way, the dean went on, that he put an iron lamp 
before a statue of one of the gods and that a thief stole the lamp. 

--That? said Stephen. He's the only man I see in this institution that has an 
individual mind. He had heard some say that the old professor was an atheist 
freemason. O the grey dull day! It seemed a limbo of painless patient 
consciousness through which souls of mathematicians might wander, projecting 
long slender fabrics from plane to plane of ever rarer and paler twilight, 
radiating swift eddies to the last verges of a universe ever vaster, farther 
and more impalpable. 

--So we must distinguish between elliptical and ellipsoidal. Perhaps some of 
you gentlemen may be familiar with the works of Mr W. Martino. 

He spoke clearly the initials and surname of the discoverer. Moynihan whispered 
from behind: 

--Good old Fresh Water Martin! 

--Ask him, Stephen whispered back with weary humour, if he wants a subject for 
electrocution. He can have me. My uncle explained to old Cotter. 

“The youngster and he were great friends. His inexplicable debts were a 
byword in his circle; he was a debonair young man. “Did the cow calve?” 

“O, of course, Lyons spots the drink first thing!” said Mr O’Connor, 
laughing. 

“Well, isn’t Freddy terrible?” said Mary Jane. 

“I wish we had an institution like that in our Church,” said Mr Browne 
candidly. 

He was astonished to hear that the monks never spoke, got up at two in the 
morning and slept in their coffins. He asked what they did it for. If he could 
only write a book and get it published, that might open the way for him. He 
could remember the way in which Mr Alleyne had hounded little Peake out of the 
office in order to make room for his own nephew. He felt savage and thirsty and 
revengeful, annoyed with himself and with everyone else. And you will set her 
mind at rest. He stood still and gazed up at the sombre porch of the morgue and 
from that to the dark cobbled laneway at its side. His own head was unbent for 
his thoughts wandered abroad and whether he looked around the little class of 
students or out of the window across the desolate gardens of the green an odour 
assailed him of cheerless cellar-damp and decay. Another head than his, right 
before him in the first benches, was poised squarely above its bending fellows 
like the head of a priest appealing without humility to the tabernacle for the 
humble worshippers about him. . peculiar cases. It is all very well for the 
man: he can go his ways as if nothing had happened, having had his moment of 
pleasure, but the girl has to bear the brunt. Some mothers would be content to 
patch up such an affair for a sum of money; she had known cases of it. It’s 
for business men, you know. . ” 

Little Chandler finished his whisky and, after some trouble, succeeded in 
catching the barman’s eye. 

But what was the name the woman had called Kitty O'Shea that Mr Casey would not 
repeat? He thought of Mr Casey walking through the crowds of people and making 
speeches from a wagonette. That was what he had been in prison for and he 
remembered that one night Sergeant O'Neill had come to the house and had stood 
in the hall, talking in a low voice with his father and chewing nervously at 
the chinstrap of his cap. Some jesuits were walking round the cycle-track in 
the company of ladies. The echoes of certain expressions used in Clongowes 
sounded in remote caves of his mind. He was impressed. He had a high opinion of 
Mr Cunningham as a judge of character and as a reader of faces. The mere sight 
of that medley of wet nakedness chilled him to the bone. Their bodies, 
corpse-white or suffused with a pallid golden light or rawly tanned by the sun, 
gleamed with the wet of the sea. This progress you will see easily in that old 
English ballad TURPIN HERO which begins in the first person and ends in the 
third person. The dramatic form is reached when the vitality which has flowed 
and eddied round each person fills every person with such vital force that he 
or she assumes a proper and intangible esthetic life. Stephen passed out on to 
the wide platform above the steps and was conscious of the caress of mild 
evening air. People began to look at us. I can see it every day. But Saturday 
and Sunday being free days some boys might be inclined to think that Monday is 
a free day also. 

Their minds, lately estranged, seemed suddenly to have been drawn closer, one 
to the other. His friends, who knew quite well Mr Harford’s manners in 
drinking, were silent. The air was very silent and you could hear the cricket 
bats but more slowly than before: pick, pock. 

Wells asked: 

--What is going to be done to them? 

--Simon Moonan and Tusker are going to be flogged, Athy said, and the fellows 
in the higher line got their choice of flogging or being expelled. 

--And which are they taking? asked the fellow who had spoken first. 

--They died for their ideals, Stevie, said Davin. I'm an Irish nationalist, 
first and foremost. But that's you all out. The cold air met him on the 
threshold; it crept into the sleeves of his coat. 

His household returned to its usual way of life. 

--Behave yourself! cried Heron, cutting at Stephen's legs with his cane. 

It was the signal for their onset. Nash pinioned his arms behind while Boland 
seized a long cabbage stump which was lying in the gutter. 

Addressing it as it lay, he said: 

--Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire! 

Taking Stephen's arm, he went on again and said: 

--Do you not fear that those words may be spoken to you on the day of 
Judgement? 

--What is offered me on the other hand? Stephen asked. 

--Do you mean women? 

--I am not speaking of that, Cranly said in a colder tone. On that point 
Ireland is united. 

He struck the ferrule of his umbrella on the stone floor of the colonnade. 

--Hell, Temple said. “I was married last May twelve months. ” 

“I hope it’s not too late in the day to offer my best wishes,” said 
Ignatius Gallaher. “Next year if I come, _parole d’honneur_. ” 

“And to clinch the bargain,” said Little Chandler, “we’ll just have one 
more now. Only at times, in the pauses of his desire, when the luxury that was 
wasting him gave room to a softer languor, the image of Mercedes traversed the 
background of his memory. He felt only an ache of soul and body, his whole 
being, memory, will, understanding, flesh, benumbed and weary. 

That was the work of devils, to scatter his thoughts and over-cloud his 
conscience, assailing him at the gates of the cowardly and sin-corrupted flesh: 
and, praying God timidly to forgive him his weakness, he crawled up on to the 
bed and, wrapping the blankets closely about him, covered his face again with 
his hands. His hands were cold and damp and his limbs ached with chill. Bodily 
unrest and chill and weariness beset him, routing his thoughts. Why was he 
kneeling there like a child saying his evening prayers? To be alone with his 
soul, to examine his conscience, to meet his sins face to face, to recall their 
times and manners and circumstances, to weep over them. The hour when he too 
would take part in the life of that world seemed drawing near and in secret he 
began to make ready for the great part which he felt awaited him the nature of 
which he only dimly apprehended. An esthetic image is presented to us either in 
space or in time. O Mary, refuge of sinners, intercede for him! O Virgin 
Undefiled, save him from the gulf of death! 

The English lesson began with the hearing of the history. And the rector would 
declare that he had been wrongly punished because the senate and the Roman 
people always declared that the men who did that had been wrongly punished. 

It was wrong; it was unfair and cruel; and, as he sat in the refectory, he 
suffered time after time in memory the same humiliation until he began to 
wonder whether it might not really be that there was something in his face 
which made him look like a schemer and he wished he had a little mirror to see. 
But there could not be; and it was unjust and cruel and unfair. And his 
white-grey face and the no-coloured eyes behind the steel-rimmed spectacles 
were cruel looking because he had steadied the hand first with his firm soft 
fingers and that was to hit it better and louder. Mr Holohan became very red 
and excited. We shook hands, laughing, and Mahony said: 

“Till tomorrow, mates!” 

That night I slept badly. In the morning I was first-comer to the bridge as I 
lived nearest. I hid my books in the long grass near the ashpit at the end of 
the garden where nobody ever came and hurried along the canal bank. Though he 
had never embraced more than the Jewish ethical code his fellow-Catholics, 
whenever they had smarted in person or by proxy under his exactions, spoke of 
him bitterly as an Irish Jew and an illiterate and saw divine disapproval of 
usury made manifest through the person of his idiot son. I'll never forget the 
first day he caught me smoking. I was standing at the end of the South Terrace 
one day with some maneens like myself and sure we thought we were grand fellows 
because we had pipes stuck in the corners of our mouths. Suddenly the governor 
passed. Mr Duffy returned to his even way of life. His room still bore witness 
of the orderliness of his mind. Some new pieces of music encumbered the 
music-stand in the lower room and on his shelves stood two volumes by 
Nietzsche: _Thus Spake Zarathustra_ and _The Gay Science_. He wrote seldom in 
the sheaf of papers which lay in his desk. He had not died. There had been no 
mass for the dead in the chapel and no procession. He had not died but he had 
faded out like a film in the sun. He had been lost or had wandered out of 
existence for he no longer existed. How strange to think of him passing out of 
existence in such a way, not by death but by fading out in the sun or by being 
lost and forgotten somewhere in the universe! It was strange to see his small 
body appear again for a moment: a little boy in a grey belted suit. ” 

Gabriel laughed nervously and patted his tie reassuringly while Aunt Kate 
nearly doubled herself, so heartily did she enjoy the joke. 

Heron made a poor attempt to imitate for his friend Wallis the rector's 
pedantic bass and then, laughing at his failure, asked Stephen to do it. ” 

“Christmas-time! Christmas-time!” said Gabriel, almost trotting to the 
stairs and waving his hand to her in deprecation. 

The girl, seeing that he had gained the stairs, called out after him: 

“Well, thank you, sir. There was two gentlemen with him. The imagery of the 
psalms of prophecy soothed his barren pride. I had riches too great to count, 
could boast Of a high ancestral name, But I also dreamt, which pleased me most, 
That you loved me still the same. A frightful hole he said it was. 

--That was a good answer our friend made to the canon. What? said Mr Dedalus. 
And just finish what you have there and we'll have another. 

--Epictetus also had a lamp, said the dean, which was sold for a fancy price 
after his death. 

Perhaps she had not told him all the story. Mr Cunningham said: 

“It is supposed--they say, you know--to take place in the depot where they 
get these thundering big country fellows, omadhauns, you know, to drill. The 
sergeant makes them stand in a row against the wall and hold up their plates. 
” 

He illustrated the story by grotesque gestures. 

“At dinner, you know. Then he has a bloody big bowl of cabbage before him on 
the table and a bloody big spoon like a shovel. He takes up a wad of cabbage on 
the spoon and pegs it across the room and the poor devils have to try and catch 
it on their plates: 65, _catch your cabbage_. ” 

Everyone laughed again: but Mr Kernan was somewhat indignant still. . Here you 
are, Tommy. ” 

Little Chandler said nothing until the barman returned with two glasses: then 
he touched his friend’s glass lightly and reciprocated the former toast. 

--Ah, do! he said. You have asked me what I would do and what I would not do. 
She moved her hand about here and there in the air and descended on one of the 
saucers. She felt a soft wet substance with her fingers and was surprised that 
nobody spoke or took off her bandage. There was a pause for a few seconds; and 
then a great deal of scuffling and whispering. Somebody said something about 
the garden, and at last Mrs Donnelly said something very cross to one of the 
next-door girls and told her to throw it out at once: that was no play. Ideas! 
Why, that bloody bleating goat Temple has ideas. MacCann has ideas too. What 
day of the week was it? He stopped at a newsagent's to read the headline of a 
placard. Thursday. Ten to eleven, English; eleven to twelve, French; twelve to 
one, physics. He fancied to himself the English lecture and felt, even at that 
distance, restless and helpless. He lay curled up at the foot of the stairs 
down which he had fallen. They succeeded in turning him over. 

The night of the grand concert came. Mrs Kearney, with her husband and 
daughter, arrived at the Antient Concert Rooms three-quarters of an hour before 
the time at which the concert was to begin. By ill luck it was a rainy evening. 

--With your people? Cranly asked. 

His last phrase, sour smelling as the smoke of charcoal and disheartening, 
excited Stephen's brain, over which its fumes seemed to brood. 

--Look here, Cranly, he said. They were waiting for the door to open and for 
the servants to come in, holding the big dishes covered with their heavy metal 
covers. 

All were waiting: uncle Charles, who sat far away in the shadow of the window, 
Dante and Mr Casey, who sat in the easy-chairs at either side of the hearth, 
Stephen, seated on a chair between them, his feet resting on the toasted boss. 
Mr Dedalus looked at himself in the pierglass above the mantelpiece, waxed out 
his moustache ends and then, parting his coat-tails, stood with his back to the 
glowing fire: and still from time to time he withdrew a hand from his coat-tail 
to wax out one of his moustache ends. Mr Casey leaned his head to one side and, 
smiling, tapped the gland of his neck with his fingers. Great parcels of 
groceries and delicacies and dried fruits arrived from the city. Vaguely first 
and then more sharply he smelt her body. 

--Stephanos Dedalos! Bous Stephanoumenos! Bous Stephaneforos! 

Their banter was not new to him and now it flattered his mild proud 
sovereignty. Now, as never before, his strange name seemed to him a prophecy. 
So timeless seemed the grey warm air, so fluid and impersonal his own mood, 
that all ages were as one to him. I remember Crofton saying to me when we came 
out----” 

“But he’s an Orangeman, Crofton, isn’t he?” said Mr Power. 

“‘Course he is,” said Mr Kernan, “and a damned decent Orangeman too. We 
must make sure of the newcomers. 

Temple bent again across Cranly, as they were passing through the doorway, and 
said in a swift whisper: 

--Do you know that he is a married man? he was a married man before they 
converted him. I mentioned Father Burke’s name. He knew that people went 
there after the theatre to eat oysters and drink liqueurs; and he had heard 
that the waiters there spoke French and German. Walking swiftly by at night he 
had seen cabs drawn up before the door and richly dressed ladies, escorted by 
cavaliers, alight and enter quickly. 

The concert on Thursday night was better attended, but Mrs Kearney saw at once 
that the house was filled with paper. 

“Did Mr Tierney say when he’d be back?” he asked in a husky falsetto. 

“He didn’t say. ” 

Eliza smoothed her dress over her knees. 

--Hoho! he cried. “Where on earth is Gabriel? There’s everyone waiting in 
there, stage to let, and nobody to carve the goose!” 

“Here I am, Aunt Kate!” cried Gabriel, with sudden animation, “ready to 
carve a flock of geese, if necessary. But Corley’s brow was soon smooth 
again. They are right. 

--O, he'll remember all this when he grows up, said Dante hotly--the language 
he heard against God and religion and priests in his own home. It was at 
Cambridge that he had met Ségouin. What excitement! Jimmy was excited too; he 
would lose, of course. I can see it in your eye. TOUCH THEM NOT, says Christ, 
FOR THEY ARE THE APPLE OF MY EYE. 

But what was the name the woman had called Kitty O'Shea that Mr Casey would not 
repeat? He thought of Mr Casey walking through the crowds of people and making 
speeches from a wagonette. That was what he had been in prison for and he 
remembered that one night Sergeant O'Neill had come to the house and had stood 
in the hall, talking in a low voice with his father and chewing nervously at 
the chinstrap of his cap. They walked forward in silence. 

--To finish what I was saying about beauty, said Stephen, the most satisfying 
relations of the sensible must therefore correspond to the necessary phases of 
artistic apprehension. This word, though it is vague, is clear enough to keep 
away good and evil which excite desire and loathing. It means certainly a 
stasis and not a kinesis. How about the true? It produces also a stasis of the 
mind. The letters cut in the stained wood of the desk stared upon him, mocking 
his bodily weakness and futile enthusiasms and making him loathe himself for 
his own mad and filthy orgies. The spittle in his throat grew bitter and foul 
to swallow and the faint sickness climbed to his brain so that for a moment he 
closed his eyes and walked on in darkness. For, remember, the fire of hell 
gives forth no light. If the lamp smokes or smells I shall try to trim it. 

--But that was stealing. How could they have done that? 

--A fat lot you know about it, Thunder! Wells said. “Weren’t some of the 
popes--of course, not our present man, or his predecessor, but some of the old 
popes--not exactly. . ” 

“Where did the boose come from?” asked the young man. 

The new-comer surveyed the deplorable figure before him and then turned to the 
constable, saying: 

“It’s all right, constable. I’ll see him home. He took her to see _The 
Bohemian Girl_ and she felt elated as she sat in an unaccustomed little. 

--Then do so, Cranly said. 

“I’m up to all their little tricks,” Corley confessed. It was quite 
simple. 

The ache of conscience ceased and he walked onward swiftly through the dark 
streets. From the foul laneways he heard bursts of hoarse riot and wrangling 
and the drawling of drunken singers. He walked onward, dismayed, wondering 
whether he had strayed into the quarter of the Jews. Women and girls dressed in 
long vivid gowns traversed the street from house to house. The faint sour stink 
of rotted cabbages came towards him from the kitchen gardens on the rising 
ground above the river. We spent a long time walking about the noisy streets 
flanked by high stone walls, watching the working of cranes and engines and 
often being shouted at for our immobility by the drivers of groaning carts. It 
was noon when we reached the quays and, as all the labourers seemed to be 
eating their lunches, we bought two big currant buns and sat down to eat them 
on some metal piping beside the river. We pleased ourselves with the spectacle 
of Dublin’s commerce--the barges signalled from far away by their curls of 
woolly smoke, the brown fishing fleet beyond Ringsend, the big white 
sailing-vessel which was being discharged on the opposite quay. 

He was much older than she. I'M BLINDED! I'M BLINDED AND DROWNDED! 

He stopped in a fit of coughing and laughter, repeating: 

--I'M BLINDED ENTIRELY. 

Mr Dedalus laughed loudly and lay back in his chair while uncle Charles swayed 
his head to and fro. 







XXXVI 

I hear an army charging upon the land, And the thunder of horses plunging, foam 
about their knees: Arrogant, in black armour, behind them stand, Disdaining the 
reins, with fluttering ships, the charioteers. They cry unto the night their 
battle-name: I moan in sleep when I hear afar their whirling laughter. They 
drove by the crowd, blended now into soft colours, to a music of merry bells. 
They took the train at Westland Row and in a few seconds, as it seemed to 
Jimmy, they were walking out of Kingstown Station. The sight of the streets 
thronged with buyers and glaring with gas recalled to me the purpose of my 
journey. 

The chief clerk glanced at the hat-rack but, seeing the row complete, offered 
no remark. As soon as he was on the landing the man pulled a shepherd’s plaid 
cap out of his pocket, put it on his head and ran quickly down the rickety 
stairs. They followed him in silence, their feet falling in soft thuds on the 
thickly carpeted stairs. From the street door he walked on furtively on the 
inner side of the path towards the corner and all at once dived into a doorway. 
A skull appeared suspended in the gloom of the doorway. His black clothes were 
tightly buttoned on his short body and it was impossible to say whether he wore 
a clergyman’s collar or a layman’s, because the collar of his shabby 
frock-coat, the uncovered buttons of which reflected the candlelight, was 
turned up about his neck. 

Mr Kernan was a commercial traveller of the old school which believed in the 
dignity of its calling. He had never been seen in the city without a silk hat 
of some decency and a pair of gaiters. By grace of these two articles of 
clothing, he said, a man could always pass muster. He carried on the tradition 
of his Napoleon, the great Blackwhite, whose memory he evoked at times by 
legend and mimicry. Modern business methods had spared him only so far as to 
allow him a little office in Crowe Street on the window blind of which was 
written the name of his firm with the address--London, E. C. On the mantelpiece 
of this little office a little leaden battalion of canisters was drawn up and 
on the table before the window stood four or five china bowls which were 
usually half full of a black liquid. From these bowls Mr Kernan tasted tea. How 
simple and beautiful was life after all! And life lay all before him. 

His tram let him down at Shelbourne Road and he steered his great body along in 
the shadow of the wall of the barracks. He loathed returning to his home. And 
when I was only a week in the convent he died and he was buried in Oughterard 
where his people came from. Perhaps she would never see again those familiar 
objects from which she had never dreamed of being divided. 

“How did you get yourself into this mess?” asked Mr Power. “There used 
always to be crowds of Protestants in the chapel where Father Tom was 
preaching. ” 

“There’s not much difference between us,” said Mr M’Coy. 

“It keeps coming like from down in my throat; sickening thing. 

And the air in the corridor chilled him too. His instinct urged him to remain 
free, not to marry. Once you are married you are done for, it said. “He’s 
really an awful bother, what with green shades for Tom’s eyes at night and 
making him do the dumb-bells, and forcing Eva to eat the stirabout. The poor 
child! And she simply hates the sight of it!. . 
